BIRDS
OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
ORDER PASSERES
FAMILY ORIOLID^.
THIS famil}^ consists of a tropical group of brightly coloured birds in whicli
yellow and black, or scarlet and black, are the prevailing hues. Although
in the general form of their heads they somewhat remind one of Starlings,
they must not be confounded with the so-called "Orioles" of the New World,
which belong to the family IdcridcE or Hang-nests and Troupials, a group of birds
linking the Finches and the Starlings, and feeding largely upon seeds and insects.
The late Henry Seebohm was of opinion that the Orioles were nearly related
to the Crows ; he, therefore, placed the genus Oriolus in his Subfamily Corvince, from
which he said that they chiefly differed in their exposed nostrils, although he
admitted that the tarsus might perhaps be slightly shorter, and the prevailing
colours different ; whilst the sexes also were dissimilar.*
In addition to the above distinctive characters, the third primary of the wing
(not the fourth or fifth) appears to be the longest, in the Orioles; whilst the
whole character of the nest, which Seebohm often made much of iu his classifi-
cation, is quite unlike that of a Crow ; being neatly woven, and slung like a
hammock between the forks of a branch : moreover, whereas the eggs of the Crows
are usually of some shade of green or blue, heavily spotted and speckled, or
blotched and mottled, with various shades of olive or brown, those of the Orioles
vary from white to salmon-pink, clearly spotted with blackish-brown, and some-
times with lilacine-greyisli shell-markings.
The call-notes and songs of the Orioles are bright and melodious ; but this
fact would not be a sufficient reason for dissociating them from the Crows ;
although our native species of Corvidcr do not shine as whistlers, in their wild
state. I think, however, that Howard Saunders was fully justified in adopting
the present family for the Orioles.
Familx- ORIOL ID^E.
The Golden Oriole.
Oriolus ga/bula, LiNN.
BREEDS in suitable localities throughout Europe south of the Baltic and in
Algeria ; passes through Greece, Asia Minor, Palestine, Egypt, and Nubia,
on migration ; and winters in North Africa, south-eastwards to Madagascar,
Natal, and westwards to Damara Land : stragglers sometimes occur in Madeira,
and the Azores.
The Golden Oriole is a regular visitor to our shores in spring, the largest
number having been seen in the Scilly Islands, and Cornwall ; it has, however,
been met with in not a few of the southern and south-eastern counties, and several
instances of its breeding with us have been recorded. In 1868, I saw a male
specimen of this bird near Linton, in Devonshire, and in July, 1887, I was just
too late to see the species in Essex ; Mr. Fitch, of Maldon (whom I was visiting)
informed me that the bird had been seen in one of his thickets during the previous
week. We visited the place iu the hope of discovering a uest, but were unsuc-
cessful.
In Ireland it has chiefly occurred on the east coast, most of the examples
being females, or immature males ; a specimen was recorded as shot in the Faroe
Islands, in Maj^ 1893, by Col. H. W. Feildeu. In June, 1906, one was killed
by a cat on the Marine Parade at Brighton. Perhaps the nearest point to
London at which it has been recognized, was noted in the "Zoologist" for 1892,
an example having apparently been seen in Richmond Park.
The male of this species is bright gamboge-yellow, the lores, wings (excepting
the terminal third of the primary-coverts) and a great part of the tail black ; the
primaries, excepting the two outermost, are edged externally, and the secondaries
are tipped with j^ellowish-white ; the two central tail-feathers are yellowish at the
base, and yellow at the tip, and the other feathers have the terminal third of the
outer webs, and borders of the inner webs yellow ; bill reddish-ochreous ; feet
leaden-grey ; iris bright red. The female is much duller than the male, greener,
and with the black colouring replaced by deep brown ; the throat, breast, and
centre of belly whitish ; the throat, breast, and flanks streaked with greyish.
Young birds are greener and browner than the female, but otherwise similar ;
nestlings have the upper parts olivaceous, spotted with yellow.
The Golden Oriole frequents gardens, groves, plantations, thickets, and the
outskirts of large woods, especially in the neighbourhood of water ; it seems to
prefer the haunts of man, yet is so shy that it rarely remains in view for more
than a minute as it flies rapidly, in somewhat Thrush-like, though more undulating
fashion, from cover to cover ; choosing ever the densest foliage, as if aware of the
perilous brilliance of its plumage : possibly it may slowly be acquiring a hereditary
knowledge of the fact that, if but a glimpse is obtained of it, an attempt at least
is made to put an end to its life ; or if it fails to comprehend so much, it may
inherit a dread of the thunder and lightning which, for generations, have heralded
its appearance : birds are not naturally fearful of man ; for even those which have
been taught by their parents to dread him, can be generally converted by gentleness
and petting : moreover the fact that a grown man can tame a small bird, whereas
even the tamest will always show the greatest fear of a little boy, certainly seems
to prove that the instinctive dread of the monkey-nature in the latter is deeply
implanted in all birds ; j ust as is that of a cat, even though that animal may
never have been seen by the bird previously.*
The nest of the Golden Oriole is nsually, though not invariably, suspended
between the forking branches of an oak, frequently at a considerable height from
the ground, and at the end of a somewhat slender bough. The outer walls are
formed of broad-leaved sedges, grasses, strips of bark (often white birch-bark) wool
etc., carefully interwoven, and including the branches between which it hangs ; the
lining consists of fii:e grasses, sometimes with the flowering heads attached. The
eggs, which number from four to five, are shining milk-white, with scattered pur-
plish black spots, and occasionall}' a few greyish shell-spots.
The season of nidification appears to be from May to June.
The call-note of this bird is clear and flute-like, but its alarm-note is a harsh
croaking khrr : the song is short but melodious: Seebohm renders it "?( '/■<■(•/, //,
vec-o''' The Rev. H. A. IMacphersou states that the males have a cat-like call : he
also observes (Zoologist, 1891, p. 467) after noting the fact that the females as
they grow older approach the male colouring: - "I do not think that the female
of this Oriole would be at all exposed to danger when sitting by bright colours.
It is not eas}' to see even a male Golden Oriole in the top of a big oak or elm
in the breeding season. The birds crouch close to the boughs if alarmed, and
neither they nor their nests are easy to distinguish among the fully expanded
leaves."
The food of this bird consists largel}' of insects and their larvae, spiders, and
the like ; but as the fruit season approaches, its diet somewhat changes, cherries
being especially relished b}^ it : in confinement it does well on the usual food for
insectivorous birds. Being both beautiful and musical it is much esteemed as a
cage-bird, and years ago I asked a friend to obtain nestlings for me ; but perhaps
it was as well that he did not succeed in securing me an}', for they seem not to
be easy to bring up. Lord Lilford remarks : - " I have found the young very
difficult to keep alive for more than a week or two, though I know of instances
in which they have been reared with success."
I think it extremelj' probable that aviculturists, when tr3'ing to rear insecti-
vorous birds, feed them far too well : in the case of large birds like Thrushes,
Starlings, or Orioles, I believe that the mixture on which I have always been
successful in rearing the two former, would answer well for all three - oat-flour,
fine peameal, and sifted Spratt's food (or ground dog-biscuit) ; but in the case of
the Orioles, it might be advantageousl}' varied with soaked ants' cocoons, or living
ants' cocoons if readil}-- procurable.
Some years ago I had a specimen of this bird sent to me ; unhappil}- it was
blind in one eye ; whether this affliction affected it or not I cannot say, but, to
the day of its death (which occurred about two years later), I found it the dullest
and most apathetic bird I ever kept ; once or twice I heard its clear bright whistle,
but as a rule it might as well have been stuffed for all the interest it seemed to
take in life.
The Orioles in coniinement do not differ from other insectivors in their pas-
sionate love of both mealworms and spiders, and a few of either every da}' are not
only wholesome, but tend to tame them if they need it.
FAMILY LANIID^.
THE Shrikes or Butcher-birds form a large and well-defined group of birds of
somewhat predaceous habits, strong in their bills, but comparatively weak
in their claws, which, nevertheless, they use for striking at and grasping
their prey. The mandibles are short and thick, the upper one with curved culmen
always with a tolerable well-defiued terminal hook, preceded, on the inferior or
cutting edge, by a slight sinus, behind which is a prominent wedge-shaped tooth ;
the nostrils are oval, lateral, and basal, and there are well-defiued rictal bristles,
as in the Flycatchers.
Dr. Hans Gadow greatly extends the family, to include many types, observing
that the diagnosis of the Laniidcv * * as given by Mr. Sharpe * * is applicable to
Lanius only : he, however, admits that the family, as defined by himself, contains
some very aberrant forms, and I think all naturalists will agree that this should
not be the case if there is an}' way of avoiding it. Families, Subfamilies, and
genera are conveniences, and the more sharply they can be defined, the more
convenient they are ; it is far better to have a small and compact family, than a
large and heterogeneous one.
Dr. Gadow observes in his Catalogue that "The Laniida:, as described in this
volume, form neither a group complete in itself, nor are the lines of distinction
always drawn closely enough."
Most of the Shrikes are inhabitants of the Old World : in Great Britain they
are represented by the typical genus Lanius alone - a group which contains alto-
gether about forty species, four of which have been obtained on our shores, though
only two of these appear to breed with us.
Some authorities consider the Shrikes to be uearlj^ related to the Crows ; in-
deed Seebohni made them a Subfamily close to tlie Corvi)ia, although he admitted
that their "exact affinities are very difficult to determine"; he considered that they
approached the Crows in the form of their bills, the strong bristles, and short
feathers partly covering the nostrils, and in their feet. Howard Saunders, from
the position which he assigns to them in liis }ilanual, seems to regard them as
more nearly related to the Flj-catchers.*
Faiuiiv^LAXIILKl-:.
The Great Grey Shrh^e.
Lauius txciibilor, LiNN.
ORNITHOLOGISTS differ in opinion as to whether this biixl is distinct from
Pallas's Grey Shrike (with the single white bar on the wing) : Seebohm con-
sidered the two forms as distinct as the Carrion and Hooded Crows, but
Mr. Howard Saunders brought forward sufficient evidence to show that they had
but little claim to the title of separate species. In his Manual we read : - " Many
of the specimens obtained in winter have a white bar on the primaries only, the
bases of tlie secondaries being black ; whereas in the typical L. cxcubitor the
bases of the secondaries are white, and the wing exhibits a double bar. The form
with only one bar is the L. viajor, of Pallas, and, as shown by Prof. Collett (Ibis,
1886, pp. 30-40) it meets and interbreeds with L. exaibiior in Scandinavia, t3'pical
examples of both races being actually found in the same brood, while intermediate
forms are not uncommon. Where the sexes have been determined, the double-
barred bird has generally proved to be a male, and the single-barred a female.
Dr. Hartert does not regard L. major as a distinct species. Typical L. excubitor
breeds as far east as St. Petersburg, beyond which, in Siberia, L. major
becomes the representative form. In tlie valley of Yenesei, the latter meets,
but does not interbreed with the whiter winged L. Icncopterus ; the last ranging
through Turkestan to vSouthern Russia, where, by its union with the typical
Z. cxcubitor, it seems to have produced an intermediate race, known as L. honieyeri.'"
The Great Grey Shrike is a tolerably frequent visitor to Great Britain in
autumn and winter* : it is also sometimes met with in England in tlie summer ;
indeed, on more than one occasion, when out birds'-nesting with a keen old student
of nature - Dr. John Grayling, of Sittingbourue, he has called my attention to a
specimen of this species, conspicuous by its pied colouring : there is, however, no
satisfactory evidence that it has nested in the British Isles, although an ^^% in my
collection taken somewhere about the j-ear 1880 by Mr. John Woodgate, at Hadley
(Herts.) certainly looks remarkably like that of L. (xcubitoy.
The adult male of this species is of a pale bluish ash grey-above, this colour
becoming paler on the rump and upper tail-coverts ; forehead, a line over each
eye, and the scapulars white ; wing black, with white bases and tips to the flights ;
central tail feathers black, outer feathers white, intermediate feathers grading
between the two colours ; under surface white ; flanks slightly greyish ; the lores,
cheeks, and ear-coverts black : bill black, the lower mandible paler at the base ;
feet black ; iris dark brown.
The female chiefly differs from the male in its slightly duller colouring, and
in having the neck and breast barred with greyish-brown. The young are dull
grey above, and dull-white below, the barring of the underparts extending over the
bell}- ; the bill and feet are also paler than in the adults.
The flight of this bird, as judged by the two or three specimens which I have
seeu, is somewhat wild and undulating: in its habits it resembles the common
Red-backed species, keeping much to the open countr}^ the outskirts of woods, or
to hedgerows ; when noticed it was in each case just leaving a bare projecting
branch of a tree ; the first specimen close to a wood in the Stockbury Valley,
the second near Dover.
The food of the Great Grey Shrike consists of good sized insects, new-born
birds, or adult birds of such genera as Parus. or Regiilus, frogs, lizards, slow-worms,
mice, etc.: it is more raptorial than the Red-backed Shrike; and, not only some-
times hunts down and hovers over its pre}^ but even holds it down on a branch
and deliberately picks it to pieces after the manner of a hawk ; though, as a rule,
it spits it on a thorn after the fashion of its kind.
The nest is usually placed at a much greater height from the ground than
that of our common British species, viz :- at from ten to thirty feet, in the forked
branch of an olive, apple, pear, oak, or fir tree ; it is bulk}', and large as that of
a Blackbird, and is formed of twigs, Ijcnts, dead leaves, green grass, and moss;
the lining consisting of rootlets, wool, hair, and feathers. The eggs number from
five to seven, usually five, and vary from creamy to bluish white, with lighter or
darker olivaceous spots aud blotches, frequently forming a well-defined zone just
above the middle, and accompanied by lilac-grey shell-markings ; sometimes
they form a large patch at one end (usually the larger one).
Nidification as a rule commences about the middle of May ; incubation lasts
fifteen days ; aud, during the rearing of the young, this species is most courageous
in their defence, driving away even the Crow-family from the vicinity of its nest.
Gatke sa3'S : - " This bird, though very cautious in general, is yet not unfre-
qnently caught in the throstle bush ; that, however, such a fate is well deserved,
is shown by the discovery of many a poor little Redbreast with its brains hacked
out, the work of this ruthless aggressor. I have even on one occasion seen a
Blackbird, as it was hastening along over the grass, pounced upon by one of these
daring robbers, and succumb, after a short struggle, to the bites of his assailant."
Lord Lilford says that about the end of December, 1880, he received a fine
young bird of this species alive : it had been taken by means of bird-lime near
Glendow, on November 19th ; he kept this bird alive for some months. Herr
Mathias Rausch (Gefiederte Welt, 1891, p. 475) observes that this bird is not of
the slightest value for aviculture as a singer, for although he both mocks well
and sings industriously, he, by his call-notes, makes the other singers crazy with
anxiety and fear, and thereby disturbs them in their song. " One can only find
it caged in the possession of peculiar fanciers, who mostly aim at completeness, in
respect of all birds belonging to this category." *
From a long study of birds in confinement, I should imagine that Herr Rausch
speaks here theoretically, and not from experience : if the cry of a Shrike in a
cage is calculated to terrify a small song-bird in another cage, surely the small
song-birds of South America ought to be alarmed by the cries of the Blue-bearded
Jay, or even those of the Sulphur Tyrant ; yet they pay no more heed to them than
to the calls of perfectly innocent birds : I believe that predaceous species are
recognized by sight, more readily than by their voice.
Family- LAXIID.^..
The Lesser Grey Shrike.
Lioiiits )iii>iof, Gjiel.
THIS is so rare a straggler, on migration, to tlie English coast, that I hesitated
to describe it in the present work. In 1883, Seebohm mentioned that
onl}^ four examples had been recorded; and, at the end of i88g, Howard
Saunders only enumerated six: it has since occurred at Dorking in 1886; near
Bournemouth in 1900; at Docking (Norfolk), in 1902; near Chichester in 1905;
near Whitby in 1906, and in Bedfordshire in 1907 : it is therefore, perhaps a pity
that a plate of it was not produced ; still if everj^ straggler to our coasts was
depicted it would add greatly to the expense of this work.
Famtly-LANIID.'E.
The Red-Backed Shrike.
Lanius coUurio, LiNN.
SEEBOHM observes that this species " is a summer visitor to the whole of the
continent of Europe up to lat. 64°, with the exception of the Spanish pen-
insula, where it is only an occasional straggler to the north-east. In Greece,
Asia Minor, and Palestine, it is only found in the pine-regions. Eastwards its
breeding range extends through Northern Persia, and throughout Turkestan as
far as the Altai Mountains. It passes through Asia Minor and North-east Africa
on migration. A few winter in the valley of the Indns ; but the great stream of
migration appears to follow the vallej^ of the Nile to South Africa, where it is
abundant during our winter in Natal, Damara Laud, the Transvaal, Angola, and
the Cape Colony."
In Great Britain this bird is common but local ; though most abundant in the
southern counties, it has rarely been met with in Cornwall ; in Wales, and the central
counties it is not imcommon, yet it is becoming rarer in Norfolk, and in Lincoln-
shire is almost unknown ; in the northern counties it is rare, probably increasingly
so ; to Scotland it is onl}' a chance straggler, though it has been recorded as
breeding in the south-east ; late in May and early in June 1906 several were
observed during migration at Fair Isle (Shetlands). In Ireland a specimen was
shot in 1878, and others were said to have been seen at the same time.
The upper parts of the male are gre}-, excepting the scapulars and back which
are chestnut-brown ; the wing-coverts black, margined with chestnut ; wings dark
brown, the feathers edged with chestnut ; the two middle tail-feathers black, the
rest white on the basal half, black, edged with white on the terminal half; frontal
band, lores, and ear-coverts black ; under parts rosy huffish, whiter on the chin
and under tail-coverts ; bill and feet black ; iris dark brown. The female is usually
quite unlike the male, her upper parts being reddish-brown, slightly barred on the
mantle, her under parts buffish-white, barred (excepting in the centre) w-ith brown ;
there is no black on the head, but a pale buff streak above the eye. Young birds
are somewhat similar to the female, but whiter on the forehead, with ill-defined
eye-streak, their upper parts barred, and their feet greyer.
The common Butcher-bird reaches us earl}' in May, and usually leaves us
again in August or September, although a late straggler has been reported as
captured in November ; it is, therefore, probable that only one brood is reared. I
have taken fresh eggs as late as the 8th June, in Kent, but not later than the
29th May, in Norfolk ; in the latter county, however, I only met with the nest
twice ; it is, therefore, possible that later nests may occur ; the first week in June
appears from my dates to be the earliest laying-time in the north of Kent ; perhaps
a few nests may be occupied earlier.
The nest of this species is most frequentl}' placed in a hawthorn bush, or
hedge, but sometimes in the fork of a stunted tree, seldom more than five feet
from the ground, and frequently less : the number of eggs is usually five, but
sometimes six. Although there is a good deal of difference in the form and tinting
of the eggs, the general character of the markings is very characteristic in most
specimens laid by this bird : the ground-tint varies from greenish white to creamy
buff, and from the latter colour to salmon-pink ; the spots vary from olive to red-
