brought to England, and liberated when the discovery was made that (being a
female) it had no song.
This species occurred in Sussex in November, 1869, and three examples were
shot in Kent in 1902; in December, 1907, and January, 1908 a pair were shot in
Sussex.
Family-ALAUDIDÆ.
THE BLACK LARK.
Melanocorypha yeltoniensis, FORST.
A FLOCK of this species visited the south-east of England in January, 1907,
three examples having been obtained. About that time it appears that
many, imported from the Continent, were on sale in Leadenhall Market.
Larks, Ortolans, and Quails are generally sent over in long "runners," which
include perhaps, from sixty to a hundred birds, almost as closely packed together
as bullocks in a cattle-truck. The jerking open of the door of one of these
runners, or the partial smashing in of its roof during a rough sea, would at once
liberate enough birds to form quite a respectable flock. No doubt such accidents
do sometimes occur with importations of birds, and thus the British list is
enriched by man-assisted immigrants.
In Great Britain this species is justly disliked and persecuted, both by
shepherds and game-keepers; yet it is still by no means rare in the well-timbered
portions of England and Wales, becoming, however, decidedly commoner in the
northern counties, whilst in Scotland it is abundant; in the islands off the
Scotch coast it again becomes scarce and it is doubtful whether it really occurs
in the Orkneys or Shetlands. In Ireland it is a very scarce bird.
The male Carrion-Crow is glossy black; purplish above, and with green
tints on the head and neck; the wings similarly tinted; bill and feet black;
iris brown. The female is perhaps slightly less glossy than the male, but does
not otherwise differ in plumage; her bill appears to be longer and more slender
than that of the male, which is unusual in the Crows. Young birds are without
gloss and the inside of their mouths is pale flesh-coloured.
As opposed to the absurd notion that because this species is proved to
hybridize freely with the Hooded Crow and produce fertile offspring, it cannot be
a distinct species, Herr Gätke shrewdly observes:-"The very circumstance,
however, that despite pairing having taken place for several thousands of years,
the two colours of the respective species have remained pure and distinct, forms
the most striking proof of the specific independence of the two; for, if they had
not existed originally as two fixed primary forms, to which the mongrel offspring
reverted, though this may have occurred only after several generations, we should
at present know neither the one species nor the other in its pure simple
colouration, but should meet only with unlimited gradational stages of mixtures
of grey and black forms."
This argument, however, is not unassailable, unless it be claimed that the
three Pheasants-P. colchicus, P. torquatus, and P. versicolor, which also interbreed
freely and produce endless intergrades are, therefore, not distinct species. It must
also be borne in mind that in some cases acknowledged sports of the same
species when crossed do not produce intergrades, but from one clutch of eggs
reproduce examples of each variety, as has been proved in the case of the
Barbary Turtle-Dove, the Gouldian Finch, and the supposed fertile hybrid known
as the Bengalee.
In many respects the Carrion-Crow resembles the Raven, inhabiting similar
haunts, whether among the rocky uplands, or in woods and game-coverts. In its
predatory habits it is almost, if not quite as much dreaded, both by shepherd
and game-keeper. Ever seeking for food from dawn till dark, the mischief done
by a pair of this species in a single season must be enormous. That this bird
has some courage seems probable from the fact that it will sometimes dispute
with a Gull or even a small Hawk, but it appears soon to weary of resisting a
therein is an advantage; the young birds at first sleep in the nest, but as they
get older they crouch down on the turf, and the moist warmth seems to lessen the
tendency to cramp; but I am sure that another and a more important thing is to
give them food containing plenty of egg and moistened ants' cocoons. When
adult, two or three mealworms a day, a handful of canary and millet-seed once a
week, and watercress when obtainable, should be given in addition to the usual
soft food.
I think it was in the winter of 1891-2 that my man, having nothing else to
do, took my nets out and brought me home thirteen Sky-Larks, in addition to a
few other birds; about eight of these proved to be cock birds, and I selected the
three best singers as cage-birds; one of these I finally retained, parting with the
remainder to friends. This bird was always tame and healthy: he lived in a two
foot "runner," half turfed and half sanded; he was a grand singer, producing the
wild song so perfectly, that if you shut your eyes you could imagine his upward
flight, and finally his dropping notes as he returned to earth. Towards the end
of 1895 he failed to get well through his moult, and one morning I found him
dead with his head under his wing.
Mr. Seebohm's account of the migration of Sky-Larks as observed by him in
Heligoland is exceedingly interesting; but unfortunately I have not space to quote
it here. Speaking of the complaints respecting the diminution of birds, Herr
Gätke says:-"To a witness, however, of the enormous passage of migrants, of
the myriads of individuals which on autumn nights travel past this island, like
the flakes of a snow-storm, not only within the area of the lighthouse, but for
miles north and south out to sea, these complaints seem quite incomprehensible.
It is surely impossible that the hand of man can exercise any perceptible influence
on such enormous migration streams"; and he adds that the number of 15,000
Larks caught in one autumn night does not approximately express a proportion
of one for each 10,000 individuals of such a migrant stream.
The figures of eggs 245-8 are from Mr. A. B. Farn's collection; 249 from
Mr. Frohawk's, and 250-4 from the author's series.
public mind by confounding this species with the Reed-Bunting, Mr. Steele
probably wished to avoid discussion, and, therefore, again entered it for the Palace
Show of that year (February 14th to 19th) as "Bunting-Cock." The bird was
then growing old, and was in poor plumage; therefore the judge passed it over:
soon afterwards it died, was stuffed, and is still in Mr. Steele's possession.*
I understand, from a letter received Feb. 6th, from Mr. W. C. J. Ruskin
Butterfield, of St. Leonards, that, among some birds in the possession of Mr.
Daniel Francis, he recently recognized an example of this species. It was caught
in an exhausted condition by one of the Coastguards men at Bexhill-on-sea, on
Nov. 3rd, 1894. Mr. Butterfield also calls my attention to the occurrence of the
large race of the Bullfinch in Yorkshire in 1894; but, as I do not consider P.
major can ever with certainty be distinguished from large examples of our familiar
Bullfinch, I did not think the fact worthy of special notice. It is quite possible
that these so-called "Russian Bullfinches" may have been the produce of typical
English ones, just as my frequently so-called "Russian Goldfinches" undoubtedly
were born of Kentish parents. A male Black-headed Bunting was shot at Little
Common, Sussex, in April 1905, and it is recorded as occurring on Fair Isle, in
September, 1907.
The adult male in the breeding season has the crown, lores, sides of face and
ear-coverts black; the back and rump cinnamon-brown; wings and tail brown,
the former with whity-brown margins to the coverts, and broad pale borders to
the innermost secondaries; the outer pair of tail-feathers with a narrow white edge
to the inner web; a collar at sides of neck and entire under surface bright golden
yellow; beak greyish-leaden; feet pale brown; iris hazel. The female is altogether
duller-above sandy-brown, with darker streaks; the rump slightly yellower, the
wing-coverts and quills margined with buffish-white; under surface sordid white,
more sandy on the breast and flanks which are also narrowly streaked with brown,
belly and under tail-coverts washed with yellow. The young nearly resemble the
female. After the autumn moult the male has dull greyish-brown margins to the
feathers, and the rump somewhat tinged with yellow, so that it then more nearly
resembles the female.
Seebohm thus speaks of the Black-headed Bunting:-"In Greece and Asia
Minor, it does not arrive until the end of April, amongst the last half-dozen
summer migrants. As soon as it comes nest-building commences; and during
the last half of May its eggs are so abundant in the olive and vine region of the
Parnassus, that when I was there I had not time to blow more than half of the
brass garden squirt: a few of the whistled notes are clear, and the song, if not
melodious, is at any rate comical enough to be not unpleasant: moreover the
energy which the bird puts into the performance is ridiculous; his head is some-
what retracted, the feathers of crown and throat all somewhat raised, his bill wide
open, his wings quivering, and his whole body shaking. As the late Mr. Witchell
observes: "In early spring the phrases of the Starling are concluded with a harsh
squealing cry." He tells us that he has heard about half-a-dozen of these birds
singing the following phrase in chorus; that the intervals were fairly correct,
and the unison was seemingly perfect: he says that one bird commenced the
phrase with the first two notes and then the others joined in. I cannot say that
I have ever had a similar experience; but then I have not had the musical
training which Mr. Witchell had received.
The warning-cry of the Starling is a cah, not unlike that of a rook, but the
cry of terror is a harsh shrieking; then there is a prolonged reedy whistle,
apparently a note of excitement, only heard in the spring; and lastly there is
the call of the male bird to his mate:-Foey dee-ur hee-ur (the hee very much
prolonged).* The cry of the young for food is very loud and harsh.
The nest is placed in any hole in a tree, a bank, a cutting, a sand- or chalk-
pit, a rock, wall, ruin, chimney, in thatches, or roofing of summer-houses, cottages,
and out-houses, in stove- or gutter-pipes. It is roughly constructed of grass or
straw, sometimes with a lining of wool and a few feathers, and usually contains
from four to six eggs, though sometimes only three, smooth and somewhat glossy
and beautifully oval; always unspotted, but varying in tint from bluish-white to
turquoise-blue; an intermediate shade between these extremes being the commonest
type.
In my "Handbook of British Oology" I have described a curious nest which
I took from the stove-pipe to a conservatory at the village of Upchurch, near
Newington, Kent, and which filled no less than twelve feet of 4-inch piping: we
took the latter to pieces and pushed the nest out in form of a long cylinder.
This nest was entirely constructed of fragments of straw or bast, with a few long
pieces at the sides, and had been collected since the arrival of mild weather and
the consequent disuse of the stove. It contained three partly incubated eggs,
which were about a foot from the top of the pipe. I do not believe that, if
whistling through soap-suds, a clear note escaping at the end of the phrase
through bubble and sputter-"chick, chick, achock; chick, chicka-chick; chick, chick,
achoo"; moreover, half a dozen Linnets quarrelling sound nearly as well as one
Linnet singing. For clearness and vigour not a note in the song of Acanthis
cannabina will compare with the joyous, though somewhat monotonous, song of
the Chaffinch: of course I am aware that this is rank heresy; but heresy is often
truth. Howard Saunders observes that "it is the capacity for learning the notes
of other birds which makes the Linnet so great a favourite for the cage": perhaps
he is right; but, although I was never without the species until after 1900, since I first
began to keep birds, often having as many as six or eight cock Linnets at the
same time, I never observed any capacity for mimicry in any of my specimens:
even the three males last in my possession, which had been flying together in
the same aviary for six or seven years, sang nothing beyond their natural
wild song. That nestling Linnets will learn a song of another bird if kept
separate from examples of their own species, as recorded by Sterland (Vide Charles
Witchell's "Evolution of Bird Song," p. 170)* is not remarkable; but it does not
account for the caging of many thousands of adult Linnets yearly.
Linnets are known to be largely migratory, and Seebohm observes:-"Although
the Linnet is a resident in this country it is probable that many, if not most of
the birds of the year join the flocks of this species that pass our islands every
autumn, and migrate further south with them."
The food of the Linnet consists principally of seeds of dock, plantain, dandelion,
groundsel, thistle, etc., and it is fond of hemp, oats, and turnip seed. Probably
when feeding its young it also eats aphides and small caterpillars. In confine-
ment German rape, canary, and oats are the best seeds on which to feed it.
Why the last-mentioned very wholesome and cheap seed is so seldom used by
aviculturists I cannot understand, unless they imagine that the smaller hard-billed
birds are unable to crack it: this, of course, is a very mistaken notion, for most
seed-eating birds, including Canaries, are very fond of oats.
When hand-reared, Linnets become extremely tame; but, if they are to be
kept so, they must be caged separately; for association in an aviary with other
birds, renders them as wild as caught specimens in a few days; a fact which I
proved first in 1886, and have since been able to confirm. It is also a mistake to
trust the rearing of caged nestlings to the parent birds; I tried this in 1887,
hanging up the cage in a tree near the nest from which I had removed the
young. The old birds are willing enough to feed their young in a cage, but the
clutches which I found or saw. One reason may perhaps have been that the nest
of this bird was the easiest of all nests to find. The males were so extremely
handsome and so very conspicuous that whilst it may perhaps be scarcely correct
to say that no other species of bird was so common, certainly no other appeared
to be so."
Further on, he says:-"the plain joins a steep rocky slope, where the olives
are smaller and more scattered, and where clematis and white and pink roses half
conceal the stony ground, and dwarf oleanders, pomegranates, figs, almonds, and
other shrubs compose a half-wild landscape, the only sign of cultivation being a
vine-terrace here and there. This seems to be the paradise of the Black-headed
Bunting; and it is not an uncommon thing to see three or four males perched
conspicuously on the top of as many isolated trees, singing in rivalry. When
disturbed it seldom flies far, but drops down from its perch, and after a short
flight, low and undulating, rises up again to the nearest tree-top, on which it is
so anxious to perch that its legs may be seen extended for the purpose long before
the desired haven is reached."
The nest is usually placed amongst creepers, such as brambles or clematis;
but often in rose-bushes; sometimes in rows of peas or beans, and occasionally
on the ground. It is large and loosely constructed of the seed-bearing heads of
small flowering plants; and is lined with dry grass, bents, rootlets, and hair.
The eggs number from four to six, usually four; they are pale greenish-blue,
with brown surface spots and grey shell spots; usually they are most densely
massed at the larger end, but sometimes they are scattered over the entire
surface; they also vary in size, though as a rule both large and small spots occur
on the same egg.
Jerdon says of this Bunting (Birds of India, Vol. II, p. 378):-"It makes its
appearance in the Deccan usually about the end of November: is found in
immense flocks, and is very destructive to the crops of jowaree, and other grains. It
leaves early in March, and certainly does not breed in any part of India." Tristram
states that it breeds in Corfu, frequenting brushwood on the hill sides, and has
an agreeable song." According to Seebohm this song consists of only "two or
three slight variations of not a very loud nor yet very melodious note, rapidly
repeated, with a slight pause in the middle. The ordinary call-note is a loud chit,
chit, and the call-note of one sex to the other a more plaintive and longer con-
tinued tsee-a." Howard Saunders says:-"The call-note of the male is a vibrating
monotonous chiririri."
As a captive, little pleasure can be derived from keeping the Black-headed
Bunting in a cage; doubtless its feeding is simple enough, millet and canary
Practically the Alaudidæ constitute an Old World family, one species only
occurring in North America, whilst, as Jerdon observes, "They are very sparingly
represented in Malayana and Australia."
Family-ALAUDIDÆ.
THE SKY-LARK.
Alauda arvensis, LINN.
FOUND during the summer months throughout the whole of Europe; nesting
in Scandinavia as far north as lat. 70°, whilst in North Africa it breeds
sparingly as far south as the slopes of the Atlas Mountains, and in the
east, in Russia and Siberia, and at high elevations in Japan, the valley of the
Amoor, South-east Mongolia, Turkestan and Persia. In winter it visits China,
North-west India, Afghanistan, Persia, Asia Minor, Palestine and Egypt. It has
been met with at Madeira, and is reputed to have occurred on Greenland. It has
also been introduced into the United States,* New Zealand and Australia.
Throughout Great Britain and Ireland, the Sky-Lark is widely distributed,
abundant, and (excepting in the extreme north) resident.
The climatic variations of the Sky-Lark have been separated under several
distinctive names, such as A. dulcivox, A. japonica, A. cantarella, A. liopus, A. blak-
istoni, A. gulgula, A. australis, A. cælivox, A. wattersi, and A. sala; but so many
intergrades exist that Ornithologists generally are now content to regard them as
one variable species.
Our Sky-Lark in breeding-plumage has the upper parts golden brown, with
blackish centres to the feathers; edges of greater wing-coverts paler; the outer-
most tail-feather white, with the exception of a blackish streak on the inner web;
on the inner web; under parts mostly white; a band across the fore-chest, the
sides of breast, and the flanks bright fawn-coloured; under tail-coverts washed
with huffish; beak pinkish-white, with the terminal half of the upper mandible
and tip of the lower mandible dark horn-brown; feet flesh-brown; iris hazel. In
confinement the beak and feet become paler and more pink in tint.
The female is usually slightly smaller than the male, has a narrower crown,
and a much narrower, straighter, and more regularly tapering beak; the crimson
on the head rarely extends quite so far backward on the forehead and throat; the
cheeks are much more stained with buff-brownish; the lesser coverts are distinctly
browner; the yellow on the wing is rarely so brilliant; upper tail coverts less
white, more mouse-brown, sometimes wholly of that colour; and the under parts
are not quite so pure a white, showing a suspicion of grey when compared with
the male. Young birds, known to bird-catchers as "Grey-pates," show no black
or crimson on the head, have buffish tips to the wing-feathers, and brownish
underparts, with indistinct spotting on the breast. The general characteristics of
the adult birds are acquired after the first moult, but the full beauty of the species
is not brought out until after its second moult.
Birdcatchers always distinguish the sex of the Goldfinch by "the colour of
the shoulder," intense black in the male, rusty black in the female: this, however,
is not so easy to note in young birds as is the different outline of the beak when
seen from above, or the greater arch of the culmen in the male beak when seen
from the side. The width of the yellow belt across the secondaries is even more
easy to note*.
Although the Goldfinch does not haunt the interior of thick woods, it frequently
hangs about the more open spaces on their outskirts, especially where rank weeds
such as thistles, teasels, or plantains abound, upon the seed of which it delights
to feed; but orchards, shrubberies, gardens, and waste patches on badly cultivated
ground are its favourite resorts in the summer time; whilst in the winter it
wanders throughout the country in small or large flocks seeking for food. A
considerable number of Goldfinches, nevertheless, joins the stream of migrants to-
wards the south in the autumn months.
The Goldfinch is certainly much rarer in our islands than it formerly was,
but I cannot think even Mr. Swaysland's statement-that at one time a boy could
catch forty dozen in a morning, or the undoubted fact that birdcatchers would
rejoice if they could do so now, will at all account for the great diminution in
their numbers; the continual reckless destruction of all kinds of birds of prey
would probably counterbalance the numbers obtained by 'catchers, who only capture
and conspicuous as the bird's plumage is, it is rarely seen until its harsh note
proclaims its departure to a safer retreat."
If not aware of the vicinity of man, however, the Jay is by no means so shy,
his curiosity soon gets the better of his nervousness and he comes into the open
to investigate the cause of every sound; yet he is ever on the alert and the least
sudden movement sends him back instantly to cover.
The nest of the Jay is believed to be rarely built at a great height from the
ground, of those which I found the highest elevation was about sixteen feet, in
the branches of a sapling too slender to support the weight of a man, so that I
and my companion were compelled to draw it gradually down until I was able to lift
out the nest from its cradle of twigs. My first nest was in a plantation of ash-
trees and so near the ground that I was able to lift it down without climbing, it
contained a full clutch of six eggs, and I had no sooner taken it than both
parents, who were close by, made the whole neighbourhood ring with their harsh
screams of rage; I caught a glimpse of one of them, but only for a moment, it
had not sufficient courage to come close.
The nest is frequently placed in hawthorn, sloe, hazel, fir, yew, or holly, and
is very compact and strongly built, though externally it has a ragged appearance,
being constructed of interlaced sticks and twigs, which become denser and are
moulded into a neat cup-shape in the centre: the lining consists of rootlets or
grasses and horsehair. The eggs number from five to seven and, excepting that
their average size is larger, much resemble one of the less typical varieties of the
Blackbird's egg: in ground colour they are pale green, so densely mottled with
lighter or darker clay-colour that their general tone is either pale olivaceous stone-
colour, or pale clay-colour; at the larger extremity which is usually slightly deeper
in tint, there is very frequently an irregular black line, like a crack: sometimes
the darker area forms a scarcely perceptible zone, the extremity itself being quite
pale. The time of nidification is from the latter end of April to about the middle
of May, most nests being found in the second month; but it has been known for
the Jay to be still later, perhaps owing to a first nest having been plundered.
The food of this bird consists in summer of worms, spiders, insects, eggs,
young birds, and fruit; but later in the year, chiefly of berries, acorns, beech-
mast and nuts. In captivity its food is still more varied, Mr. J. H. Gurney,
(Zoologist 1892, p. 429), gives the following as the diet supplied to two tame Jays-
"The first one would eat worms, grapes and acorns, with equal avidity; but its
beak could not pierce the acorn's husk until it had been partly pared off, then
holding it with its foot the bird would rapidly pull it to pieces with its strong
beak. In the same way, if a dead sparrow is given to a Jay, it will stand on one
chiefly haunts the borders of woods, parks, plantations, shrubberies, gardens, and
dense hedgerows; but in the winter it may often be seen feeding in company with
Sparrows, Chaffinches, and Buntings, in stubble-fields, farms, and gardens. Except-
ing when feeding its young, the song may frequently be heard; it is always bright
and clear, and some individuals sing remarkably well, reminding one somewhat of
a Norwich Canary; only, unfortunately the song is always interrupted at the end
of a phrase or two by a harsh zshweer, and terminated with the same disagreeable
note. The call-note is a sound like tirri, or a shrill sharp chirp, somewhat resemb-
ling the chink of the Chaffinch; the call of defiance is the same as the harsh note
introduced into its song; the call of the young for food resembles that of many
Finches-chiwi or chirri.
The nest is very frequently placed in hawthorn hedges; indeed I once found
three nests of this bird within a distance of two yards, two of them being only a
foot apart, and all three at a height of about five feet from the ground; it is also
commonly placed in clumps of tall furze-bushes; I have also found it in laurus-
tinus bushes, in ivy on walls, in the forks of low trees, chiefly yews and spruce-firs,
and a friend found me a nest among the twigs sprouting from the stump of a
branch, cut from a tall oak (about eight feet from the ground) this being placed
at a greater elevation than any other nest of the species which I have met with;
Seebohm, however, speaks of the Greenfinch sometimes selecting a site "fifty feet
or more from the ground, in a fork of an elm, or even in a cavity in the trunk."
The nest varies considerably, the thickness of the walls being from one to
two inches, and usually very firmly, though occasionally loosely constructed; the
depth of some nests is also double that of others; as regards materials I
cannot do better than quote my own descriptions of eight selected nests from my
"Handbook of British Oology";-"1.-An outer framework of rough twigs and
coarse roots, the walls of fine roots and green moss, and the lining of fine reddish
fibrous roots. 2.-Of coarse, half-decayed straws, bents, and roots, thickly lined
with fine root-fibre. 3.-Of slender withered grass-straws, and a mass of
greyish wool, felted together, and lined with a few black horse-hairs. 4.-
Of sticks, roots, and moss externally; of wool, vegetable fibre, and less moss,
inwardly, lined with a few black horse-hairs. 5.-Of coarse plaited roots
externally; of finer roots, moss, slender white hairs, and a little wool, matted
together inwardly, and lined with a few black horse-hairs. 6.-Of green moss,
with a few twigs and roots, and thickly lined with cocoanut fibre and a few black
hairs. 7.-Loosely constructed of green moss and spiders' webs, with a few twigs;
lined with vegetable fibre, and a few black hairs. 8.-Of twice the usual depth,
(like a nest within a nest) formed of green moss, wool, and fibrous roots, in patches,
nevertheless agreeably Lark-like; its call-note, with which it cheerfully greets me
as soon as it hears my step, two large rooms off, is loud and mellow. Most of
the birds are peevish in captivity, and tire themselves by impetuously fluttering
against and shaking the bars of their cage; this is probably due to the fact of
one's not being able to avoid selecting the prettily-marked old males for cage-
birds. My example, however, which I have kept now for more than ten years,
is so tame that it will take flies from the finger, and even allows me to put my
hand into the cage and softly stroke its back with my finger.
In the spring this bird will accept so-called earwigs, and in the summer flies,
but rejects both these insects as autumn approaches. Small and moderately sized
moths are always acceptable, and spiders are received with the utmost readiness at
all times of the year. Its staple food, however, is Canary-seed, and as much
green food as is procurable. Sustained in this manner, the bird keeps in excellent
condition, renewing its plumage every autumn to such perfection that it is in no
way inferior to a bird living in a state of nature."
This is a point which I have always insisted upon, with regard to the treat-
ment of Larks-To keep them in condition the grass and other seed which they
freely eat when wild, must be represented by Canary-seed: they will eat millet,
but they undoubtedly prefer Canary, for if the two seeds are mixed together and
supplied in one pot, the Canary is all consumed before the millet is touched. It
is also no uncommon thing for a Lark to husk every seed before swallowing it;
this is done either by fixing it in a convenient crevice and hammering it with the
end of the bill, or by giving it two or three blows in the feeding trough; but a
hungry Lark swallows it with the husk on, and probably ejects it as a pellet
later, as most insectivorous birds do.
When one considers that, during the winter, Larks would be simply starved
to death if their lives depended upon insects; and consequently that they then
subsist almost entirely upon seeds of weeds or grain; it becomes evident that-to
feed them in captivity solely on soaked ants' cocoons, yolk of egg, and mealworms,
is in the highest degree unnatural.
To obtain good singers of any of the Larks you may either hand-rear them,
purchase them when recently fledged, that is as "branchers" (the bird-catcher's
term for young Larks) or catch them when fully adult; it matters very little,
only hand-reared birds and branchers will be tamer at first than adults (although
even these become perfectly tame in a few months) and, in addition to their
natural song, will pick up parts of the songs of other birds.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE GOLDFINCH.
Carduelis elegans, STEPH.
R. SHARPE states that this bird inhabits Europe generally, except the
extreme north; the Canary Islands, Madeira, and the countries bordering
the Mediterranean: it is a winter visitant to Egypt and Palestine. In
Siberia it extends to Omsk and Krasnoyarsk, and winters in Turkestan.
In Great Britain the Goldfinch is pretty generally distributed throughout
England, and in suitable localites in Scotland and Ireland, though the wholesale
destruction of woods, plantations and so-called waste land has rendered the species
comparatively rare and local in many parts of Great Britain. In the north of
Kent, where the nest might be obtained fairly commonly, year after year, about
thirty-five years ago, it is now hardly ever met with, excepting perhaps in
strictly private gardens, pleasure-grounds, and orchards: indeed, I believe it is
fully twenty-three years since I last saw a wild Kentish Goldfinch in the summer-
time.
This is the most beautiful of our British Finches: the adult male has the
forehead broadly satiny-crimson, extending at the sides as a superciliary streak
which sometimes passes behind the eye and unites with a broad patch of the same
colour on the front of the face below the lores, and on the throat; the lores, feathers
at base of beak and chin black: crown and feathers behind the cheeks black;
cheeks snow-white (slightly stained in the centre with buffish-brown, especially
in young birds) continuous with a white belt encircling the back of the throat:
back greyish copper-brown, with a transverse white spot on the nape; wings blue-
black, occasionally slightly glossed with Prussian-green on the lesser coverts;
greater coverts golden-yellow; the basal two-thirds of the primaries, excepting the
first, with the outer webs bright golden-yellow, the secondaries also with broad
yellow bases, so that the wing appears to be broadly belted with yellow; inner
primaries and outer secondaries tipped with white, inner secondaries with buffish-
brown; upper tail-coverts whitish, washed with buffish-brown, in Continental birds
sometimes white, varied with sienna or reddish-buff; tail feathers blue-black, the
central ones tipped with white, the two outer ones with a large oval white patch
and Ireland, this bird is decidedly commoner in Scotland, where a few pairs remain
to breed: the first nest being obtained in the Shetlands by Saxby, on July 2nd,
1861. In July, 1886, Messrs. Peach and Hinaman found nest and young in
Sutherlandshire, and in June, 1888, Mr. John Young discovered a nest with five
eggs. I believe it was obtained later by Mr. W. R. O. Grant. In 1903 nests
were found on the spurs of the Grampians, stretching southwards between Rannoch
and Glen Lyon, and in 1905 on a mountain still further south.
The adult male in breeding-plumage has the mantle, scapulars, inner second-
aries, terminal half of primaries, four central tail-feathers and greater part of the
next pair black; the outer webs edged with white; outer feathers mostly white;
centre of lower back and rump black (with white edges to the feathers) but the
sides white; remainder of plumage white; beak and feet leaden-black; iris deep
hazel. The female has all the black parts of the plumage greyer, and with pale
edges to the feathers, the head and neck mottled with blackish. After the autumn
moult the feathers of the upper surface, breast, and flanks are bordered with dull
chestnut, which gradually changes to white during the winter, and the beak
becomes orange-ochreous tipped with blackish. The young are greyish, with dark
centres to most of the feathers, but the wings and tail resembling the autumn
plumage of the adults.
This bird has received many trivial names, such as-The Lesser Pied Mountain
Finch, The Snow-bird from Hudson's Bay, The Tawny Bunting, The Mountain
Bunting, The Lorrain Bunting; but its prettiest name (and that by which it is
almost as well-known as Snow-Bunting) is Snow-flake.
Seebohm writes respecting the habits of this bird as follows:-"The flight of
the Snow-Bunting is peculiar, and is something like that of a butterfly, as if the
bird altered its mind every few seconds as to which direction it wished to take.
It can scarcely be called an undulating flight. The bird certainly does rest its
wings every few seconds; but either they are expanded when at rest, or they are
rested for so short a time that the plane of flight is not sufficiently altered to
warrant its being called undulating. The Snow-Bunting is almost entirely a
ground-feeder, and is consequently continually seen on the ground. These birds
run along the snow with the celerity of a Wagtail on a sand-bank; but they can
hop as easily as a Sparrow, and I have very often seen them do so. The idea
that they seldom or never perch on trees is a mistake, which has no doubt arisen
from the circumstance that on the steppes, where they delight to winter, and on
the tundra, where they breed, there are no trees. In the valley of the Petchora,
we had abundant opportunity of seeing them in trees." (Hist. Brit. Birds, Vol. II,
pp. 127-128).
gling desperately. No sooner, however, is the hen Chaffinch once subdued than
she is treated with gentleness and affection; pairing frequently takes place on the
earth, but sometimes on a branch.
In the autumn there is a considerable immigration of Chaffinches, chiefly on
the eastern and south-eastern coasts of England, and it would seem that there is
a return migration early in the year, as this species passes over Heligoland both
in September and March.
Early in February the Chaffinch begins to practise his song; at first this
bears no resemblance to the full powerful melody which is eventually developed;
but merely sounds like tsip, tsip, tsip, turrrrrl, torrrrrl, a sort of liquid bubbling;
a little later there is an effort to get in the terminal notes, then by twos and
threes the other notes come out weakly; until, by March, the full song is remembered
and rings out from the trees and hedgerows; when perfect it is a full rattling
scale, ending variously in different individuals, although the same bird at times
varies his terminal phrase: sometimes it is chucha churr, sometimes tissi-ear, and
frequently wheatear; the bird-catchers call the birds which use the first phrase
"chuckwados," and those that use the two last "kiss-me dears." In Kent, and I
believe in some other counties, the Chaffinch is said to sing-"If we wait another
month, we shall have the Wheatear."
The call-note of the Chaffinch is, I believe, that described by my late friend
Mr. Charles Witchell as "a loud short whistle very rapidly slurred upwards in
the interval of about a fifth or sixth. It may be pronounced twit."* The call
of the young for food is chizzit, chizzit, chizzit; Mr. Witchell (who, however,
renders it chizzick), says that he has heard the old birds utter the same note. The
war-cry undoubtedly is a shrill chick, chick, with a slight metallic n sound before
the k: this cry has been variously written twink, spink, pink, bink, and fink; it
is usually uttered twice only by our Chaffinch, but the Madeiran Chaffinch repeats
it rapidly four times; so that it almost leads up to his rather monotonous and
poor song, the terminal phrase of which was never uttered by my male example.
As the song of the Chaffinch is itself sung in rivalry and as a challenge, there
is every reason for believing that it has been gradually evolved from the single
note of defiance and not from the call-note.
The nest of this species varies exceedingly; not, as has been stated, with the
deliberate design of the bird to conceal it; for, if such were the case, this pretty
little structure would never be so glaringly conspicuous as it sometimes is; but
simply from the fact that, like most birds, the Chaffinch uses those materials
which are most handy, provided that they are capable of being woven into a soft
birds, nor indeed, in some cases, old ones either, being safe from its prying eyes
and carnivorous propensities. There are, however, one or two instances on record
of its having remained to nest in this neighbourhood, but not of late years."
Mr. Stevenson also quotes the following from St. John's "Natural History
and Sport in Moray," p. 59:-"It kills newly-born lambs, picking out the eyes
and tongue while the poor creature is still alive. It preys on young grouse,
partridges, hares, etc., and is very destructive to eggs of all sorts. In certain
feeding spots in the woods I have seen the remains of eggs of the most extra-
ordinary variety and number. No sooner does a wild duck, pheasant, or any bird
leave its nest, than the Hooded Crow is on the look-out, and I have no doubt
that a single pair often destroys many hundred eggs in the course of a season.
All birds seem aware of this, and Peewits, Gulls, Redshanks, etc., attack most
furiously any Crow which they see hunting near their nests. The 'hoody' is
also very fond of young ducks, and destroys great numbers. In the mountains
it is bold enough to make prize of the eggs of the eagle, peregrine falcon, or
osprey, if the parent birds happen to be driven off their nests."
In their "Notes from Redcar" ("Zoologist," 1893, p. 6), speaking of the immi-
gration of Hoodies from the 12th to the 30th of October, Messrs. T. H. Nelson,
and F. Pilling observe:-"The Hoodies are generally noticed in largest numbers
during thick weather in October and November." According to Seebohm this
species migrates by day, and Gätke says:-"In the autumn, and with favourable
weather, the migration commences at about eight o'clock in the morning, with
flocks of from fifty to one hundred individuals; the movement soon passes into a
stream of flocks, consisting of from a hundred to at least five hundred examples,
and continues in this manner, without gaps of any kind, until two o'clock in the
afternoon. We can scarcely, in a case of this kind, assume that we are dealing
with a stream or route of migration which just chances to cross Heligoland, for
the movement proceeds in equal magnitude from east to west as far as the eye
can reach. More than this, on days when powerful migrations of this kind take
place, the migration-front or column has been seen from boats eight miles north
of the island to stretch farther to the north, as far as the limits of vision extend;
while on the south it reached, simultaneously and in equal magnitude, up the
Weser, at least as far as Bremerhaven, as was determined from the steamer which
regularly plies between this island and the latter place. We thus get a migration
column of at least thirty-six geographical miles in breadth."
Herr Gätke proceeds to make many other observations of considerable interest,
which it would be well worth our readers' while to peruse, but for which we
cannot find space here; nevertheless, his concluding paragraphs are, we consider,
cleverly imitated the gutteral note of the Missel-Thrush. Unless they are required
for training, it is better to catch than to rear Starlings, selecting brightly coloured
males, close-feathered, with long snake-like neck and head, and generally slender
body: these are really the best birds, although they rarely win at shows unless
kept warm and forced before their time into summer plumage. Most judges of
British birds ignore form, being simply attracted by bright colouring.
Family-STURNIDÆ.
THE ROSE-COLOURED STARLING.
Pastor roseus, LINN.
OF the geographical distribution of this bird, Seebohm says:-"It breeds
more or less regularly in Asia Minor and on the western shores of the
Black Sea. The most westerly recorded instance of its breeding in large
numbers is in Lombardy. At Villafranca, near Verona, in 1875, great numbers
bred in the castle, having followed in the wake of a flight of locusts. They have
not been known to breed in Palestine; but Tristram describes enormous numbers
passing through on their spring migration. Eastwards they breed in South Russia
and the Caucasus, Turkestan, and South Siberia, as far east as Lake Saisan.
They have been observed in North-west Persia and Afghanistan in spring. They
winter in India in enormous numbers, and are occasionally found as far south as
Ceylon. The most easterly locality recorded of this bird is the Andaman Islands,
where flocks were seen by Col. Tytler, in January ("Ibis," 1867, p, 331). At
this season of the year, and on the spring and autumn migrations, they have
occurred in almost every country of Europe, from Spain in the west to Sweden
in the north, and have been known to stray as far south as North Africa, one or
two examples having been recorded from Egypt and Algeria."
Family-CORVIDÆ.
THE CHOUGH.
Pyrrhocorax graculus, LINN.
IN a cage the general aspect of this bird is rather that of a Starling than a
Crow; but on the wing it has a decidedly more Corvine character. Of its
distribution outside the British Isles, Howard Saunders says:-"In the
Channel Islands, especially Guernsey, the Chough is tolerably common, and it
breeds in some of the rocky portions of the north-western and west coasts of
France, as well as in those of Portugal. It is, however, in inland, mountainous
situations, such as some parts of the Alps, the Carpathians, the Parnassus, the
Urals, the Appenines, the Pyrenees, and the south of Spain, that it is most
abundant, while on the rocky islands of the Mediterranean it is plentiful; it is
also resident in the hill-regions of Northern Africa, Abyssinia, Arabia, Asia Minor,
the Caucasus, and Persia, and throughout the mountain ranges of Asia, as far as
north-eastern China."
Although scarcely a migratory species, it is considered capricious, inasmuch
as localities long inhabited by it are, for no apparent reason, suddenly abandoned;
in Great Britain this has been especially noticed. In 1868 and 1869, I observed
great numbers of Choughs about the cliffs at Clifton, and again between Linton
and Ilfracombe, but some twenty years ago a friend who was staying at the latter
place had the greatest difficulty in obtaining an egg of the species. Seebohm
observes:-"It still breeds in Cornwall, the north of Devon, on Lundy Island,* and
at many places on the Welsh coast, in Glamorgan, Pembroke, Angelsey, Flint,
Denbigh, and possibly on the rocks of the Calf of Man. On the east coast of
England, More states ("Ibis," 1865, p. 132) that a few pairs were known to nest
near Fast Castle, in Berwickshire, and Hancock corroborates the statement, whilst
in the Channel Islands the bird, although local, still breeds. In Scotland it appears
to have been much commoner recently than at the present time, and to have
now quite deserted its inland haunts, being only found on the ocean cliffs."
"In Ireland the numbers have also decreased."
simply gigantic specimen in a large pail hanging on the branch of a tree, the
depth of this nest was at least 16-inches, and the width close upon a foot: it
was too bulky to carry away and was hardly suitable for a collection, so I left it
where it was. But the most marvellous Sparrow's nest I ever saw is one in my
collection obtained from the forking branches of a large hawthorn, at Kemsley,
near Sheppy; it is roughly circular, saucer-shaped, and altogether has more the
character of a Duck's than a Sparrow's nest; the four eggs in it also all differ,
the darkest egg being similar in character to the most richly coloured eggs of
the Tree-Sparrow, whilst the lightest is white with smoky-grey spots and dots
crowded chiefly at the larger end, so that it has quite a Shrike-like character.
(figs. 142 and 143 are from this nest.)
The number of eggs ranges from four to seven, but rarely exceeds six: the
colouring both of ground-tint and marking varies more than in most birds, and
as I have selected all the best-marked modifications for illustration on our plate,
it would be only a waste of space to describe them; but it may perhaps be as
well to call attention to the fact that the whitest and least boldly marked varieties
are found in places to which light has had little access.
In 1877 I had clear proof of the unthinking obstinacy of the Sparrow, a pair
having built in the roller-box of a sun-blind during dull weather, the pulling down
of the blind with the first hot day destroyed the nest; no sooner, however, was
the blind pulled up than the Sparrows set to work and replaced it. This went
on so continually and repeatedly that I wrote to the late Charles Darwin, asking
him whether he did not think it would be interesting to publish the fact, as
evidence of the feeble reasoning powers of this species: his reply dated May 9th,
1877, I still have, with other letters from him.-"My dear Sir, I have been
always inclined to think that Sparrows were acute and crafty birds, but you
certainly show that they are fools, and if they go on behaving in so idiotic a
manner, you will do quite right to expose their conduct in some public journal!
-Yours sincerely, Ch. Darwin." As this unreflecting perseverance under difficulties
continued altogether for nearly a month, I sent an account to the "Zoologist,"
1877, pp. 299-300.
The House-Sparrow can hardly be said to have a song, its best performance
being little more than a chirrup interspersed with sharp chirps, but often early
in the morning you will hear several apparently engaged in conversation
chow, chow, chivi, chivi, chow, chivi, to which the reply is whit! perhaps followed
by two or three rapid harsh chirps: chivi is the cry of the young for food,
and the adult bird when caught in a trap expresses his rage by indignant
chows. I never heard the Sparrow utter any sound like tell, but think the
greenish-white, one of them with only a few delicate hair-lines, a second with a
single additional rectangular line across the lower third enclosing a second shorter
club-shaped line, the two other eggs were fairly normal in marking; another nest
of four is slightly tinted with lavender, the markings are mostly fine, and look
like tangled silk, mixed with a few thicker streaks of purplish-black, one of these
eggs is almost a perfect sphere; other greenish eggs have extraordinary markings
(like written notes in music, oriental letters, or the little men which children
sometimes draw on their slates) intermixed with finer scrawlings and patches of
lavender; the lavender tinted eggs chiefly differ in being clouded with a deeper
shade of the same colour, often at the larger end; one egg which I obtained
vaguely resembles that of a Chaffinch, being of the same size and with very few
linear markings, only the diffused patches are greyish-lavender, instead of looking
like blood-stains.
The number of eggs in a clutch varies from four to five, four being the
commoner number; if less are obtained in an incubated condition, either the first
nest has been destroyed before the completion of the clutch, or one or more eggs
abstracted or broken accidentally. During incubation the hen bird sits very close;
so that frequently you may almost tread upon the nest in stepping through tangled
brushwood; then fferrelup! that sound of hurried flight familiar to the birds'-nester,
makes you suddenly look to catch a glimpse of the startled bird rounding a bush,
or passing over a hedge; and in a minute you are crouching down and turning
aside the foliage to look at its treasures: often when searching among brambles
and hawthorn have I felt my hand brushed by the wing of this bird as it has
started from its nest.
I am satisfied that three, if not four, broods are reared in a year: the male
is said, on good authority, to assist the female in incubation, but in every instance
in which I have flushed the bird from the nest, it has invariably been the hen;
indeed the male has always been singing somewhere close by. It is well-known
that the hens of many species as they grow old assume a plumage closely resemb-
ling that of the male bird; therefore, unless a cock of this species has actually
been shot, or at least been heard to sing, upon the nest, and its sex proved, I
think the statement that it assists the hen in her duties, should be received with
a certain amount of hesitation.*
The food of the Yellow Hammer in the breeding-season consists largely of
insects and their larvæ; also, like all the Buntings, this species devours insects
whenever it can obtain them; but, like all more or less insectivorous birds, it is
continual noises of a great city do not seem to disturb them at all, as is evident
from the fact that Rooks still build and breed in the old trees which have been
left standing in the busiest parts of London.*
The nest is usually commenced or repaired early in March, but after
unusually mild winters building operations sometimes commence much earlier.
After the exceptionally open winter of 1895-6 I saw several young Rooks sitting
just outside the nests in which they had been hatched as early as the 6th March,
whilst I had noticed the Rooks in a rookery close to my house repairing their
nests in January, and in February a pair daily visited my garden for worms: a
friend of mine living at Dulwich first directed my attention to the early pre-
parations for nesting made by these birds, assuring me in January that he had
seen a pair of Rooks carrying sticks up to their nest. In the "Feathered World"
for April 24th, 1896, Mr. W. N. Rushen says:- "I saw two young Rooks near
Wanstead Park, on April 8th, which were as strong on the wing as their parents;
and, to be as forward as this, they must have left the nest for some weeks."†
The structure is usually very compact, formed of strong sticks and twigs,
plastered with mud, lined with turf, straw, roots, and sometimes moss, dead
leaves, and feathers. The eggs number from three to five and vary considerably
both in form and colouring, exhibiting similar forms to those of the Carrion-
Crow; they are, however, noticeably smaller. The ground-colour varies from
pale blue to green, and is lighter or darker in different nests; the spotting is
olive-brown, fine and sparse, or coarser and thickly distributed over the entire
surface and sometimes with a few larger deep brown blotches or streaks.
Of the eggs figured on our plate, figs. 241 and 242 are from my own
collection, and 243 and 244 from that of Mr. A. B. Farn's.
When the young first leave the nest they are awkward and weak on their
legs, sitting huddled on a branch with their heads well down between their
shoulders; as the wind sways the branch they tip forwards, and have to open
their short wings to recover their balance; but, after daily short excursions
from branch to branch, they gradually gather strength and confidence, until
finally they are able to accompany their parents to the fields and get their
first lesson in finding food for themselves.
To those who have not noticed the methods by which the various species
of Crows are taught by their parents, I cannot do better than recommend the
admirable account given by Mrs. Olive Thorne Miller in her fascinating book
FAMILY FRINGILLIDÆ.
THIS family consists of a number of hard-billed, largely seed-eating, birds.
Howard Saunders only distinguishes these as Finches (Fringillinæ) and
Buntings (Emberizinæ); but the Catalogue of Birds, of the British Museum,
regards the Grosbeaks as constituting a third Subfamily (Coccothraustinæ). Seebohm
agreed with Howard Saunders in uniting the latter Subfamily to the typical
Finches; but, in my opinion, there is more difficulty in distinguishing between
some of the foreign Buntings, and Grosbeaks, than between the latter and the true
Finches. I would, in any case, rather err on the side of too much regard for
structural differences, than on the opposite side.
The Fringillidæ have the tenth primary, which is often well-developed, con-
cealed by a longer covert; it has thus escaped observation and been asserted to
be non-existent; the bill is hard and conical, and is (to my mind) better described
by the term "beak"; the Finches feed their young from the crop, regurgitating
the food when partially digested: naturally during the breeding season, I believe
all are more or less insectivorous, although seed forms their staple food: in
confinement, however, many of the Finches will live for many years upon seed
alone.
The Coccothraustinæ, or Grosbeaks, of which the Hawfinches are typical, are
characterized by a very heavy and powerful beak, with hardly any angle to the
chin; the nasal bones produced backwards beyond the front margin of the eye-
socket, (cf. R. B. Sharpe, Cat. Birds, Vol. XII).
The Fringillinæ, or true Finches, the type of which is our English Chaffinch,
usually have a somewhat less powerful beak, with the angle of the chin slightly
more defined, but still very feebly shown; the mandibles almost terminating at
the same point; the nasal bones not produced backwards beyond the front margin
of the eye-socket.
The Emberizinæ, or Buntings, of which our Yellow Ammer may be considered
typical, have a well-marked angle to the chin; the lower mandible terminating
well within the upper one, and not completely closing in the centre of the cutting
edge; the more typical Buntings also have a hard horny knob on the palate, and
a compression of the lower mandible to meet it; they also walk when on the
earth, and are largely insectivorous (in which respects they approach the Chaffinch
and Brambling among the true Finches): many Buntings, however, are not walking
birds.
The Fringillidæ are favourite cage-birds, chiefly on account of the ease with
which their food can be provided.
every tone and movement is full of animation and delight, as if it were beside
itself with pleasure; this is particularly the case in the nesting season, at which
time I have seen the male flying slowly towards some topmost spray of a fir-tree,
pouring forth his delightful little warbling song, which very much resembles that
of a Goldfinch, but is to my ears far sweeter. It very often sings when flying,
but more frequently when perching on some fir-tree top; indeed the Siskin in
spring seems more like a visitor from a happier world."
The Siskin usually places its nest high up, near the end of a lateral branch
of a fir- or birch-tree, or even at the top against the main stem; but the nest is
also said to be sometimes built quite low down in spruce, furze, or juniper bushes,
though Seebohm was inclined to doubt the correctness of the records upon which
this statement is based, Naumann having asserted that the nest is always in con-
ifers, seldom less than twenty-five feet from the ground. The nest itself is neatly
constructed of moss and rootlets, upon a slight foundation of heather and bents,
and the lining consists of vegetable down, horsehairs, and sometimes a few feathers.
The eggs number from five to six, and exactly resemble those of the Goldfinch
in size, colour, markings, and variations: they are bluish-green, usually pale;
spotted, dotted, and sometimes streaked with dark chocolate-brown, and with lilacine
greyish shell-markings; as with the eggs of all the typical Finches, they vary
considerably in size.*
Like all the true Finches the hen bird builds the first nest and incubates
alone, although the male as usual tries to help and only succeeds in hindering;
whether he works in earnest at the second nest I do not know: but, from his
close relationship to the Goldfinch, he should be capable of doing so.
The Siskin feeds largely on seeds of weeds and beech-mast; but during the
breeding season it eats a considerable number of aphides, and probably small green
caterpillars, milky, unripe seeds of groundsel, sow-thistle, and similar weeds; whilst
at all seasons, it is as mischievous as a Tit in destroying tender buds. In captivity
it eats the usual seeds, being especially fond of hemp and teasel, also soft food,
green food, and (although I do not approve of such food) it is as fond as the
Goldfinch and the whole of the Tits of picking a bone, clinging to it in all
positions, and behaving in every respect exactly like a Tit. The Siskin is one
of the most charming of all aviary birds, on account of its wonderfully confiding
nature. I turned a pair which I purchased in November, 1889, about three weeks
after their capture, into a large aviary; and, in three days, they had so thoroughly
learned to trust me, that they flew into my hand and disputed over poppy-seed
The upper parts of the male Jackdaw are glossy black with purple and green
reflections; the ear-coverts, nape and sides of neck ashy-grey inclining to white;
under parts dull black; bill and feet black, iris greyish-white. The female is
slightly smaller than the male and has a slightly smaller and duller grey patch
on the nape; her bill is also a trifle shorter. The young are dull black, the
grey patch very feebly indicated.
There are few places where the Jackdaw cannot find a home: coming from
the Continent to England, this bird may be seen in numbers flying in and out of
holes in the cliffs of Dover, its incessant cries chack, chack, being a welcome sound;
so also in country or town, in ruined castle or modern palace the Jackdaw is
everywhere to be seen. I must confess that I like the Jackdaw: he is a bird
with considerable sense of humour, and (in spite of much persecution) he seems
to bear no malice. The late Lord Lilford, however, could find nothing good to
say of him: the following being some of his remarks respecting the Jackdaw in
his "Birds of Northamptonshire":-"This amusing but most pernicious bird is
extremely common in our county, and probably only too well-known to most of
our readers. In the hollow trees about the park and pleasure-grounds of Lilford
they used to swarm at the breeding-season, till we found it absolutely necessary
to wage war upon them in the interests of our garden, poultry, and game, to say
nothing of those of the Barn Owl, a species for which we have always entertained
a sincere respect and affection. The Daws not only carried off numbers of young
chickens, pheasants, and partridges, and committed havoc among our green-peas
and other vegetables, but in several instances, to our knowledge, took possession
of the Owls' nests, destroyed their eggs, and piled up their own nests in the cavities
selected by the harmless and most useful bird of night; occasionally, however, the
tables are turned, as we have previously mentioned when treating of the Barn Owl.
For these misdemeanours we have for some years past made a practice of shooting
the old Jackdaws and destroying their nests and eggs wherever we found them,
with the result of decided benefit to ourselves and our neighbours. The Jackdaw
disputes the palm for noisy and obtrusive impudence with the House-Sparrow, and
does not, to our knowledge, compensate us in any way for his misdoings. That
the Daw fulfils his duties in the great scheme of nature I do not deny, but must
confess that I am unable to discover what they may be."
Seebohm, however, although he admits that it levies blackmail on the Gulls,
says of the Jackdaw:-"It is quite as harmless a bird as the Rook, and at certain
seasons of the year it is very useful. You have but to watch its actions in the
fields to be convinced of this."
The Jackdaw's flight is like himself, strong, but somewhat purposeless; he
the second feather white on the outer web only: under parts buffish-white, spotted
and streaked with blackish-brown on the throat, breast and flanks; bill dark
brown above, paler below; feet yellowish-brown; iris hazel. The female is rather
smaller than the male, and has shorter wings, but does not differ in plumage:
young birds have broad buff tips to the feathers. After the autumn moult both
sexes are more tawny in colouring.
In order to tell the sex of the Sky-Lark, the London bird-dealers take the bird
in the left hand with the tail towards them, and with the right hand draw down
the wing until the point of the first long primary touches the tip of the outer-
most tail-feather: the wing of the male being distinctly longer than that of the
female, the so-called "shoulder" then appears to be much more angular in the
former than in the latter sex. I have seen considerable numbers of birds thus
tested, the males being caged and the females returned to the catchers, and I
never knew the test to fail: but females are rarely forwarded by experienced bird-
catchers, most of them being killed at the nets and sold to the poulterers.
Although abundant enough on moors and commons, downs, grassy cliffs, and
even mountains, the Sky-Lark certainly prefers arable land, pastures, and parks:
it seems especially to delight in fields of clover: it shuns all places thickly
studded with trees, such as woods, copses, and plantations, but is almost always
to be met with in country cemeteries.
Excepting when in pursuit of another individual of its own species, the flight
of the Sky-Lark does not strike one as being particularly rapid; it is somewhat
undulating, and there is a fluttering motion, even when it is crossing a field, which
is very characteristic. The male, when soaring, always commences its upward
flight with this butterfly-like hovering action, and sometimes it is continued until
it reaches its highest elevation; at other times it rises obliquely and rapidly, its
song the whole time fitting its movements: in its descent it sometimes drops
abruptly perhaps for forty or fifty feet, pauses a second and drops again, making
perhaps three or four stages in its fall, until, as it nears the ground, it flutters
round in a half-circle to the earth; each drop being accompanied by the finishing
shrill whee, whee, whee of its song: often it comes down with a wide graceful sweep.
The nest is placed in a depression in the ground, generally amongst growing
crops, often merely sheltered on one side by an overhanging tuft of coarse grass
or other vegetation, and sometimes without any shelter whatever; a singular nest
with a kind of lid formed of water-weed, which was pointed out to me by a
shepherd in the Isle of Sheppy, is described in my "Handbook." The nest itself
is more or less loosely constructed of dried bents and dead grass, and lined with
finer grass-stalks. The eggs number from four to five, and sometimes three may
it, as with buoyant but somewhat jerky flight, it floats down some broad pheasant
drive, exhibiting its pied wings and superb tail to perfection; it, however, rarely
remains long in view, its aerial excursions being generally of short duration.
Although fond of woodland and forest, the Magpie is not strictly confined to
them, for it often wanders through well timbered valleys, or even over moorland;
whilst in the pastures it may not unfrequently be observed upon the backs of
feeding cattle, searching for ticks and maggots. Referring to this habit Lord
Lilford observes:-"I am assured by an experienced tenant-farmer in our neighbour-
hood that he considers this remedy worse than the disease, as the Magpies in the
search for maggots acquire a taste for beef, and cause hideous sores which are
difficult to treat."
The Magpie is at times both restless and noisy, but chiefly when aware of
the approach of man whom it has learnt from sad experience to look upon with
suspicion. Naturally less shy than the Jay, it would doubtless soon be confiding
if mankind would but treat it more gently: it is indeed an ascertained fact, that
wherever it is not persecuted, this bird commonly builds its nest close to the
habitations of man, and in most conspicuous places. Even where it is not looked
upon with favour, this is sometimes the case, for in 1884, I noticed the unmistak-
able nest of this species at the top of a lofty elm-tree within a hundred yards of
the house in which I was staying, at Upchurch, near Newington, Kent. The
tree formed one of a row along the end of a field, and quite close to the main-
line of the Chatham and Dover Railway. I also saw the nest close to the little
village of Bobbing in a small spinney.
Although half afraid to trust one, and ever on the alert, the Magpie often
keeps but a short distance ahead as one passes through its haunts, either in the
trees above, or on the ground; at one moment it will be peering and chattering
from a branch, the tail rising and falling, or opening and shutting, after the
manner of the South American Jays; now it will drop buoyantly down to the
scrub, whence it will appear upon the path, and then for a short space flit down
the same to rise again to a branch and repeat the whole performance.
The Magpie is single-brooded and breeds early, usually constructing its nest
towards the end of March, though sometimes as late as May, and most frequently
placing it in the outer branches, though less often near the highest point of the
main stem: sometimes, however, tall, or even low hedges as well as thorn-bushes
are selected as a building site. J. B. Pilley, ("Zoologist" 1891, p. 352), observes
that, when he was a boy, he and his companions believed that there were two
species of Magpies, one building in a tree, the other in a hedge, and he says:-
"I can distinctly remember the sorry plight I sometimes presented after climbing
cause of the melanism, which may have been due to keeping the birds in a
moist warm atmosphere.
During the summer months the Bullfinch chiefly haunts the outskirts of woods,
plantations, dense shrubberies, private pleasure grounds, where clumps of conifers
with tangled undergrowth of brambles have been left, to vary the landscape or to
form cover for game, or clearings covered with two or three year's growth; less
frequently lanes skirted by tall hedges; but never far from woods. In such places
it builds its shallow nest, and once I found one in a loose wayside hazel-hedge,
about three feet high and quite at the top, barely concealed by a leaf.
The favourite site for the nest is on the upper surface of a horizontal branch
of a spruce-fir, or yew; but I have also met with it in dwarf hawthorns tangled
with blackberry vines, and in the side of a hawthorn, half buried by elm-foliage,
on the edge of a wood: sometimes a small box-tree is selected, or very rarely a
slight gap in a tall hedge. The outer framework of the nest consists of a tangled
platform of slender twigs or roots, surrounding a neat, and sometimes stoutly
built, but usually somewhat frail looking cup of plaited rootlets and bents, with
a lining of root-fibre and black horse-hairs. According to Seebohm "in some
nests a little wool or a feather or two are found," but I never found either,
though occasionally a dead leaf drifts into the cup and is left there. The eggs
number from four to six, but rarely exceed five; in colour they are pale blue,
sometimes almost white; spotted with blackish-brown, mixed with spots or blotches
of purplish, red-brown, and now and then lavender; most eggs are chiefly spotted
at or near the larger end; sometimes there are one or two Bunting markings
among the spots; rarely the zone of markings occurs near the smaller end of the
egg; and lastly, in the very aberrant, almost white variety, the whole of the
spots are chocolate-brown diffused at the edges.
There is no doubt that, when feeding its young, the Bullfinch eats aphides,
small green caterpillars, seeds, and leaves of weeds; so that, in a measure, it
atones for the mischief which it does to the fruit-grower in autumn and spring.
It is said that the Bullfinch frequently rears two broods in the season; its
first eggs being laid towards the end of April; the young would, therefore, be
hatched early in May, and perhaps be able to look after themselves by the end
of that month; the second nest, if built in the last week of May, would again
have eggs by the end of the first week in June. My own experience is that, in
Kent, nidification is later; the first nest having eggs in the early part of May,
and the second early in July, so that the old birds must be close upon, or in
their moult by the time that the young leave the nest. Is it certain that these
birds would be reared? I am inclined to doubt it. In 1890 a pair of Bullfinches
to the inner web excepting towards the tips, the primaries narrowly margined with
yellow and, excepting the first three, with broad yellow bases, forming a belt
which extends across the secondaries: central tail-feathers blackish, the remainder
yellow, with black shafts and broad blackish tips; a broad superciliary streak
extending from above the eye to the nape; lores blackish; sides of face greenish
yellow, more green on the ear-coverts; chin black; throat and breast bright
yellow; belly white, the flanks sordid yellowish, streaked with black: beak horn-
brown, paler at the base (becoming paler and pinker in confinement); feet pale
brown (also becoming more fleshy in captivity); iris dark brown. The female
is slightly smaller and has a broader crown than the male, she is altogether duller
and greyer in colouring, with less yellow on the rump, wings, and tail, and with
the underparts much more streaked; she has also no black on the crown or chin.
The young are still duller and greyer than the female.
The Siskin is a bird of the pine woods during the breeding season, though
in winter it wanders about the country in small or sometimes large flocks, which
reach the south of England in September, and are eagerly welcomed by the bird-
catchers who net considerable numbers to sell as cage-birds. The Siskin is an
extremely restless bird, and in all its actions reminds one strongly of the Tit-mice;
its flight is rapid but irregular, like its song; but the latter to my mind is superior
to that of any other British Finch, in spite of its comical finish with six coupled
notes and a harsh chair at the end. The call-note is neither glee, zeisig nor a weak
tit-tit-tit-tit; it is distinctly hootelee, hootelee; the word glee is doubtless a corruption
of the telee (which is all that the ear can compass in the open, though in an aviary
with sloping roof the whole sound is clearly audible); the term zeisig probably
was given to this bird by the Germans more on account of its frivolous nature,
than because it in the slightest degree represented the character of either song
or call-note;* I can only explain the quadrupled tit, on the assumption that a
party of young Robins happened to be in a tree occupied by Siskins.
Mr. R. J. Ussher's notes on this species, which I quoted in my "Handbook
of British Oology," will bear repeating here; he says:-"In April and May,
1857. Siskins were unusually common at Cappagh, in the woods of fir, both on
the low ground and on the hill-side; in fact, the woods were continually ringing
with the song of this bird. You might hear it as it flew over the wood uttering
its peculiar cry, half chirp, half song; at one time flying straight forward, as if
to some destination, then turning and making a circuit, as if it did not know its
own mind, or as if it were loth to descend from its joyous flight, then again
darting off in a new direction, whilst its notes would gradually die away. Its
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE ORTOLAN BUNTING.
Emberiza hortulana, LINN.
IN Scandinavia the northern limit of its breeding-range extends to the Arctic
circle"; "in the Ural Mountains it is not found further north than lat.
57°." "In Siberia, the eastward limit of its range appears to be the valley
of the Irtish, as far as its source in the Altai Mountains; thence it extends
westwards through Turkestan and Persia to Palestine and Asia Minor. In all
these countries it is a summer migrant, and in the two latter it is principally
known as passing through on migration, though a few retire to the mountains to
breed. This appears to be the case also in Greece and Italy; but to the rest of
Europe, south of the northern limits above mentioned, it is a regular summer
visitor. A few remain to breed in North-west Africa, but the majority passes
southwards in autumn, and doubtless winters somewhere in West Africa. It also
passes through Egypt on migration, and winters in Abyssinia; a few also winter
in North-west India." (Seebohm, Hist. Brit. Birds, Vol. II, pp. 153-4).
Although there can be little doubt that several of the Ortolans shot, captured,
or seen in Great Britain, have escaped from the poulterer's shops, having been
imported from the Continent to supply the tables of the wealthy; the fact that it
is a common species at no greater distance than the north of France, renders its
occasional visits to our coasts extremely probable. The first recorded instance of
its occurrence was that of an example caught in Marylebone Fields, and figured
by Brown in 1776, since which time a good many specimens have been either
obtained or seen in various parts of England; many others in Scotland, and
especially from Fair Isle, where a number arrived in May 1906, also one at least
from Ireland.
The adult male Ortolan Bunting has the head, nape, and upper breast greenish-
grey; eyelid whitish; lores, a moustachial streak, the chin and fore-throat sulphur-
yellow; back, wing-coverts, and secondaries pale reddish-brown, with blackish
central streaks to the feathers; lower back and rump with barely defined streaks;
the remaining feathers of the wings and the tail brown, the three outer tail
feathers, with large terminal patches of white on the inner webs; lower breast,
Family-CORVIDÆ.
THE NUTCRACKER.
Nucifraga caryocatactes, LINN.
OCCURS in pine-forests throughout the Palæarctic region; breeding in
Europe, in South Norway, Sweden, some of the islands of the Baltic, the
Black Forest, the Alps, Carpathians, and mountains of Hungary: it
probably breeds also in the mountains of Southern Spain and Sardinia. Although
apparently a resident bird in the countries of its birth, it occasionally wanders in
winter, occurring in various other portions of Europe, as well as in Japan and
North China.
To Great Britain the Nutcracker is an occasional straggler, about twenty-five
tolerably well authenticated instances of its appearance in our islands having
occurred, usually in autumn or at the commencement of winter; but in May,
1899 one frequented a fir-plantation near Thetford, Norfolk, one was shot at Ilkley,
Yorkshire, in January 1901, and another at Benenden, Kent, in January 1905. In
Scotland it has occurred, but not in Ireland.
In colouring the Nutcracker is dull chocolate, freely spotted with white,
excepting on the crown, wings, and tail: wings greenish-black, some of the
secondaries tipped with white; the tail feathers black, tipped with white; bill
brownish-black; feet black; iris brown. Female similar, but rather smaller and
with the wings slightly browner. Young sordid brownish, with the spots greyish,
but otherwise like adults.
Stevenson (Birds of Norfolk, p. 284) commenting upon the difference in the
form of the bill in various examples of this bird shot in Great Britain, suggests
that it is a sexual character; the distinctions which he records are exactly such
as one would expect to find-the male with a stout straight bill, the female with
a longer and decidedly narrower one.* I believe that all Passerine birds differ
sexually in this respect, and that the male birds recognize the females by their
faces alone; indeed there is little difficulty in detecting the dissimilarity in the
features of any of these birds, when the sexes are compared side by side. Using
The nest itself is built after the pattern of that of the Bullfinch, a foundation of
twigs of Scotch fir, enclosing a cup-shaped structure of dry grass and lichen;
the lining being formed of somewhat finer materials, mixed with moss, wool, or
feathers.
The eggs number from four to five, but rarely exceed four; they vary in
colouring from greenish-blue to greyish-white, and are spotted, speckled, and
sometimes almost streaked with dark-brown; there are also underlying spots of
pale reddish-brown, and the larger end is occasionally dusted with greyish. The
specimen figured on our plate is from the collection of A. B. Farn, Esq.
Whilst feeding their young the Crossbill feeds largely upon caterpillars, and
other larvæ, also the chrysalides of a little moth, as well as buds of trees; but
later, as the fir- and pine-cones ripen, it extracts the seeds with its powerful man-
dibles and feasts upon them. Berries of various kinds are largely eaten, and
Seebohm says that the Crossbill is very fond of apples, but this is not strictly
correct, for it simply tears the fruit to pieces and drops it, eating only the pips;
I frequently observed the destructive act in the case of a pair of caged Crossbills
once in my possession, but my birds never ate the pips.
Lord Lilford (Birds of Northamptonshire, Vol. I, pp. 205-6) observes:-"We
have generally found the Crossbills very tame and easy of approach, and a flock
of these birds, busily employed in feeding on the seeds of a snow-laden fir-tree,
is a beautiful and most interesting sight. Their actions in quest of food very
much resemble those of the smaller Parrots as they cling to and clamber about
the large cones, from which they extract the seeds with wonderful rapidity. In
confinement we have found this species, though it soon becomes perfectly tame,
invariably very restless, and constantly climbing over all parts of its cage as if
seeking to escape. As above mentioned, fir-seeds are the natural and favourite
food; but these birds will readily feed on hemp-seed, and almost any of our
common berries." "Although we have found our tame birds very fond of the
pips of apples, we never could induce them to extract the said pips from the fruit
for themselves."*
My own experience of the Crossbill as a cage-bird agrees very closely with
the above as regards its disposition and behaviour: the following are my notes on
this species: In the winter of 1886-7, my friend Mr. J. Johnston gave me a pair
of Crossbills, and within a week the cock-bird would take sunflower seeds from
my fingers. These birds are quiet but amusing creatures, much like Parrots in
their actions. I placed their seed in one of the ordinary tin hoppers to prevent
their wasting it, but in two days they had found out how to lift up the lid at
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
BRANDT'S SIBERIAN BUNTING.
Emberiza cioides, BRANDT.
AN example of the Chinese race of this species, said to have been obtained
near Flamborough, in October, 1887, was purchased in June, 1888, by Mr.
R. W. Chase, of Birmingham: there seems, however, to be some question
as to the date of capture;* and, in any case, it appears to me to have no claim
to be called a British species.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE RUSTIC BUNTING.
Emberiza rustica, PALLAS.
AN accidental straggler to our shores, of which the first example was captured
near Brighton, on October 23rd, 1867, the second was shot on the Holder-
ness coast, Yorkshire, on September 17th, 1881, the third captured at
Elstree reservoir, near London, on November, 1882. A young male was shot at
Westfield, Sussex, by a boy in September 1902, a female was recognized at St.
Leonards in 1906; another, captured in Northumberland in 1902, was exhibited
at the Crystal Palace in 1905, two examples were secured in Scotland in 1905
and one in 1906. It is tolerably certain that nearly all the specimens of this
and the following species which are from time to time exhibited at bird-shows,
are Continental specimens.
belly, and under tail-coverts pale reddish-brown; beak vinous-brown; feet reddish
clay-coloured; iris dark brown. The female is altogether duller and browner than
the male, the head greener and streaked with dark brown. Young birds nearly
resemble the female, but are yellower and more streaked below, and only have
white patches on the two outer pairs of tail-feathers.
After the autumn moult the head and breast of this species are somewhat
greener, and the beak paler, more flesh-coloured.
According to Hamilton, the Hindostani name for this bird is "Jamjohara."
Respecting the habits of this bird when at liberty, Seebohm remarks:-"I
found the Ortolan Bunting breeding on the mountains in the pine-regions both
of Greece and Asia Minor. When I was at Valconswaard, we constantly heard its
plaintive monotonous song, as it sat perched for a long time on the branch of a
tree in the lanes, or in the hedges that surround the fields close to the village;
and in the wilder districts of Norway, when driving in our carioles from Lille-
hammer towards the Dovre Fjeld, it was by no means uncommon in the trees by
the roadside. It is not a shy bird, and frequently remains for a very long time
on the same twig, generally near the top of the tree, especially in the evening,
when its simple song harmonizes with the melancholy stillness of the outskirts of
the country village."
The nest of the Ortolan is formed in the latter half of May, being placed
in a slight depression on the ground amongst herbage, under bushes, or in the
open fields. It is formed of dry grass strengthened with roots, and is lined with
rootlets and hair. The eggs number from four to six, and vary from pale lilac to
rosy-salmon, boldly blotched, spotted, and slightly streaked with purplish-black,
chiefly towards the larger extremity, where the markings sometimes form an
imperfect zone; the shell-markings are violet-greyish: in form they vary much
in the same manner as eggs of the Yellow Hammer.
The food of this bird does not materially differ from that of the other species
of Emberiza, consisting mainly of insects in spring and summer, and of seeds and
grain in autumn and winter.
The song of the Ortolan Bunting consists of one melancholy whistled note
repeated five times, the fifth repetition being prolonged-"Hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo, hoooo."
I have heard it dozens of times, and am absolutely certain that this is a fact.
To be sure of a song, it is necessary to make a note of the exact sounds whilst
the bird is uttering them; if you wait until you are lying in bed in a somnolent
condition and attempt to recall a song, you may feel quite positive that you have
hit upon the very notes; you reach over to your pockets and abstract pencil and
paper to jot the phrase down before it escapes you: later on, you compare your
and always remain nervous in a cage; the species of the genus Icterus, however,
are marvellously tame birds. In one respect, in addition to their general outline,
the true Starlings resemble the so-called "Meadow-Starlings"; they are very
gregarious.
In their nidification the Sturnidæ as a rule differ both from the Icteridæ and
Corvidæ; building their nests of all kinds of rubbish, in holes or crevices of
trees, banks, rocks, walls, or buildings: their eggs are uniform in colouring and
usually greenish-blue; but both in the Sturnidæ and Icteridæ there are exceptions
to this broad distinction.
No birds are so easy to capture as Starlings, nets and traps awaken no suspicion
of danger in their unreflecting brains; they see food, and rush in helter-skelter
to secure it; so that a small trap will sometimes secure from three to five at
one fall.
Family-STURNIDÆ.
THE STARLING.
Sturnus vulgaris, LINN.
GENERALLY distributed over the greater part of Europe, breeding as far
to the south as Northern Italy. The European birds which migrate, pass
the winter in the south of France, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Greece, Northern
Africa and Palestine. The Asiatic birds breed in Southern Siberia, Persia,
Turkestan, and eastward to the Amur: they winter in India, passing through
Mongolia on migration.
In Great Britain the Starling is partially resident and generally distributed
throughout Great Britain and Ireland; in the latter island it used to be rather
local in the breeding-season, but it now nests in every county; in Cornwall and
The Corn-Bunting, in spite of its clumsy aspect, is very strong on the wing,
and may be recognized from the fact that its legs hang down as it pursues its
undulating flight; it also frequently sings as it goes. It is very fond of dusting
itself in the road after the manner of a Sparrow or Skylark.
The nest is either placed in a depression in the ground, in a tuft of grass,
ragged-robin, or other low-growing herbage; in brambles, or freshly-sprouting
hawthorn on ground recently cleared; also in fields of growing corn, peas, or
clover: it is large, deep, cup-shaped, and roughly constructed of mingled coarse
and fine grass, occasionally (though rarely) with a fragment or two of moss, and
sometimes a few roots; the bulk of the nest really consisting of a thick inner
lining of fine grass and black horsehair. The eggs number from four to six, five
being usual; they frequently resemble abnormally large eggs of the Yellow
Bunting; as a rule they are pale pinky-lilac, but sometimes creamy-white; the
markings are blackish-purple or deep pitchy-brown, with greyish-lavender shell-
markings; they vary considerably in character, either consisting of finely and
densely scribbled lines, of boldly scrawled streaks, of combined streaks and blots,
of broad irregular smears and paler blurred spots, or of partly confluent blots,
sometimes forming a zone near the larger extremity of the egg.
The time of nidification is from about the last week of May to the first week
of July, one brood only being reared in a season; the hen is a close sitter, and
rarely leaves her nest until one has almost put foot or hand upon her; so that
apart from the size of the eggs, there is seldom any difficulty in identifying them.
During the breeding-season the food of this bird consists very largely of
insects and their larvæ; but it has been said to eat both peas and beans, and it
is certain that it devours quantities of unripe corn: in autumn and winter the
Corn-Bunting lives almost exclusively upon grain and various kinds of seeds, in
search of which it frequents rick-yards, stubble-fields, and pastures.
Although this species is tolerably common in Kent, I do not think I took its
nest more than half a dozen times during the seventeen successive years in which
I was an enthusiastic birds'-nester; but as I had a strong objection to trampling
down crops on the bare chance of discovering a nest, it is probable that I may
frequently have passed within a few yards of a nest of the Corn-Bunting without
being aware of the fact.
This is not a suitable bird for the Aviculturist, being unpleasing in appearance
and voice, as well as voracious; it is, therefore, rarely caged. It is, however,
possible that we underrate the vocal powers of this bird, for in the "Zoologist" for
1887, P. 300, the late Rev. H. A. Macpherson proves that it has some capacity for
mimicking the notes of other species; he says:-"When birds'-nesting on the Upper
when perched or fluttering in the air, like a Tree Pipit: the song is described as
a melodious warble, similar to that of the Lapland Bunting and Shore-Lark; when
flocks of this and other species are flying together they are said to twitter after
the manner of other Finches; the alarm note is described as a loud tweek, and the
bird has another note resembling the harsh zshweeo of the Greenfinch and Brambling,
but Lord Lilford's observations* prove that this is not the call-note; it is more
probably a note of defiance: indeed Saxby probably means this note in his
description of "the sudden jarring sound which is uttered by the bird when suddenly
directing its course towards a neighbour. That the note in question is sometimes
one of anger I have repeatedly observed when two of the birds have been quarrelling
over their food." (Birds of Shetland, p. 91.)
As a cage-bird, the Snow-Bunting, in spite of Herr Gätke's adverse estimate,
is pretty generally admired; and is very frequently exhibited at shows. Stevenson's
opinion of the species certainly differed widely from that of the veteran of Heligo-
land, for he says:-"In confinement, I have found the Snow-Buntings very gentle
in disposition and extremely affectionate to one another, forming an amiable
contrast in both respects to the Brambling Finches. A pair, which were kindly
sent me for my aviary in 1862, by Mr. Fowler, of Gunton, near Lowestoft, netted
from a very large number at that time frequenting the Corton beach, attained very
nearly their full summer plumage, their beaks also, which are yellow in winter,
assuming a dark leaden tint. Both these birds, unfortunately, suffered from a
diseased state of the feet, which were painfully swollen, and the scutella on the
anterior portion of the tarsi and toes were greatly enlarged and ragged. With
this exception, they lived in apparently good health till the autumn of 1863, when
the female wasted away and died, and the male survived his partner only a few
weeks."
It is certain that the Snow-Bunting ought not to be restricted to a cage,
unless it be a very large one: half the charm of this beautiful species consists in
seeing it fly: moreover it is only to be expected that a bird accustomed to wander
over some of the wildest regions of the earth and sea, should feel stunned and
miserable when confined within narrow limits and constantly subjected to inspection
in a stuffy room. An out-door aviary would be the most suitable home for it, and
the larger the better. Swaysland indeed states that "as it is a somewhat dull
bird, it is not desirable for either cage or aviary," and others have told me that
it makes a stupid cage-bird; but Swaysland gives no details; indeed his account
of the species inclines one to the belief that he is not speaking from personal
experience: in any case its song should atone for everything, for Captain H. W.
from his pouch, rearrange the feathers, and hop off with the air of having done
a very clever thing."
As regards the possibility of this species breeding in confinement, I may
quote the following note given to me by Mr. J. E. Harting for my "Handbook
of British Oology" :-"In March, 1864, a pair of tame Ravens which had the run
of a garden belonging to Mr. Winterbottom, of Cheltenham, built a nest in a
box in a shed about six feet from the ground. The nest was built of sticks, old
fern-leaves, and the stalks of dead wall-flowers, and was lined with dead leaves
and tufts of grass. On March 4th two eggs were found in the nest, and the
following day a third was laid; but the hen bird did not sit well, perhaps
because too much disturbed by visitors, and the eggs were not hatched."
Lord Lilford's last pair of Ravens, which, however, had considerable liberty,
reared four young ones, all of which were living in 1894. In 1908 Mr. St.
Quintin's Ravens hatched out five strong young ones.
Mr. J. H. Comyns, of Lyvenden, S. Devon, forwarded to me a full account of
a Raven and Buzzard taken by him in 1896 from nests in trees:-"The Raven
was perfectly, I may say aggressively, tame within a week, but the Buzzard
remained obdurate for fully three times as long, his timidity and suspicion being
truly exasperating." "As soon as my bird was full-grown, I tried the
experiment of turning him in with 'Grip' the Raven (who is confined in a
disused stable on account of his depredations in the neighbours' gardens). As I
anticipated, 'Grip' instantly dashed at the intruder with murderous intent, but
what followed was a surprise to me. The Buzzard, after flying two or three
times round the stable, hotly pursued by 'Grip,' suddenly alighted on the floor
and confronted him with every feather bristling. The valour of the sable bird of
Odin was evidently tempered with a wholesome caution; he stopped too, with
ruffled head held low down and open beak, panting like a hound, whereupon the
Buzzard to his astonishment and consternation sprang at him. He instantly beat
a headlong retreat, and the victor, after pursuing him for a short time from
perch to perch, rested on his laurels. For a fortnight after this, the Buzzard
was master of the situation, and the Raven got nothing in the shape of meat to
eat unless I was there to give it to him. The Buzzard would stoop at him and
snatch his food out of his very beak, as he unearthed it from his various hiding-
places. 'Grip' now changed his tactics, and took to sneaking up behind and
furtively tweaking the Buzzard's wings or tail, and strange to say, a persistent
course of these harrassing attacks has now utterly destroyed the Buzzard's spirit,
evidently too superficial to stand at all a severe test, and reduced him from a
really noble-looking bird to a woe-begone wretch, denuded of both tail-feathers
bearable; but, to see Starlings to perfection, they should be kept in a good-sized
aviary.
I have frequently seen Pastor roseus offered for sale, but was not sufficiently
struck with the bird to give the price required for it. Herr Wiener, however,
observes (Cassell's Cage-birds, p. 424):-"I doubted the accounts I had read of
Starlings waging a war of extermination against locusts and grasshoppers; till
seeing one day a Rose-coloured Pastor offered for sale, I remembered that I had
a hot-pit over-run with crickets, and resolved to try an experiment. The Pastor
was placed in an aviary, and I proceeded to catch crickets by placing balls of
crumpled brown paper into the warmest corners of the pit. Hundreds of lively
crickets could be shaken out of the papers in the morning, and I could thus
produce at pleasure something like a swarm of grasshoppers. A well-bred terrier
will face any number of his natural enemies-rats; but his zeal is nothing com-
pared to the Pastor's powers of methodical destruction of grasshoppers and crickets.
The crickets covered the ground on which the bird stood: they ran up his legs
and over his body, and coolly would he peck away, devouring one after the other,
until none were left. Where he put all the insects seemed incomprehensible;
but the immense services which such insectivorous birds, with endless appetites,
can render to the agriculturist are palpable."
In confinement this species should be fed like the Common Starling upon
the usual soft food, with the addition of such fruit as happens to be in season,
and any insects which can be obtained. Doubtless, like Sturnus vulgaris, it would
be all the better if allowed to have access to a saucer of seed: the fact that the
bird is a perfect scourge in the Indian fields of white millet being a sufficient
answer to those aviculturists who assert that seed is an unnatural food for insect-
ivorous birds.
runner," an elongated cage about two feet in length, by nine inches high, wired
in front only. In one corner I fixed a Sedge-Warbler's nest, put my birds in one
by one, keeping my hand over to prevent their jumping out until all were inside,
when I covered them with a warm flannel. When they began to get hungry off
went the blanket and the whole family tumbled out of bed and stood in a row in
front of the door shouting-tee-u, tee-u, tee-u; and after their meal they raced up
and down their cage until weary, and then tumbled back into bed and I covered
them up again. They seemed strong and sound, but one by one they got cramp
and died until I had lost them all.
I subsequently purchased a young male and an old female and at first kept
them together, but finding that they did not get on well together I separated
them, keeping the male bird in an ordinary Lark-cage and the female in an aviary
where she contented herself with running backwards and forwards continually over
about a foot of ground, never flying, excepting when startled, when she flew up
recklessly and fell back regardless of consequences to the detriment of her plumage.
The male turned out a good singer and was so tame that he used to peck and
pull at my finger when I put it through the wires; he was also very intelligent
and would claw the wires and look round at a bottle containing watercress, of
which he was very fond, evidently asking me to give him some.
In July, 1887, I obtained two nestling Sky-Larks and brought them up upon
my Nightingale food, and in October they both began to sing, but one of them
died the following year; the other made a grand singer, and used to introduce
the song of the Persian Bulbul into the middle of its performance: it lived for
several years.
In May, 1888, I took a nest of three young Larks when they were only six
days old (I first saw them as eggs) and was obliged to take them when I did, as
I was then returning home. Although they all had a touch of cramp, I success-
fully reared them, but during their autumn moult two of them died; the third,
which was a wonderfully tame little bird, I turned loose in an aviary where it was
quite happy; it used to strut about in a consequential manner with its crest up,
and although it was a small bird it sang so well that I felt certain it must be a
cock and never examined it; eventually it settled the point by laying an egg.
This bird was very fond of perching upon a branch with the long hind toe and
claw hanging straight down over the back of it, but it always roosted on the earth
after the manner of its species.*
Judging by my own experience of rearing Sky-Larks I am inclined to think
that a turf in the cage, with a hole cut in it, and a Whitethroat's nest fixed
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE BULLFINCH.
Pyrrhula europæa, VIEILL.
DR. SHARPE gives the distribution of this species as follows:-"Western,
Central, and Southern Europe. The eastern range is undefined, but it
apparently ranges as far as Central Russia." The larger race known to
aviculturists as "Russian Bullfinch" is regarded by the Doctor as a distinct
species, which he calls "Pyrrhula pyrrhula." I must say I do not approve of
this adoption of the generic name for the species, and should prefer to follow
Brehm in calling it Pyrrhula major: it occurs in Northern and Eastern Europe,
and in Siberia. Of late years a good many examples of the larger northern race
have visited the Shetland Islands, and in 1894 two were obtained in Yorkshire.
The Bullfinch, or Bloodolf, as it is called in Norfolk, is pretty generally
distributed in all well-wooded districts throughout the British Isles.
The male bird has the upper part of the head to below the eye and back-
ward to the nape, as well as the chin, glossy blue-black; the mantle and back
bluish ash-grey; the rump white; the larger wing-coverts black, broadly tipped
with white; flights and tail black, but the primaries somewhat ashy on the inner
webs and the second to the fifth with narrow whitish border to the emarginate
portions: the outer web of the innermost secondary largely suffused with red:
the sides of the face, neck, and under surface bright salmon-red, the vent and
under tail-coverts white; beak, black; feet dark brown, changing to flesh colour
in confinement; iris brown. The female is slightly duller in colouring on the
upper parts, and the whole of the red is replaced by soft Dove-brown. The young
most nearly resemble the female, but have no black on the head, and a sordid
white wing-bar.
It has often been said that feeding entirely on hemp in confinement has the effect
of rendering the plumage black, just as that of the Canary is altered to orange-
vermilion by extensive cayenne feeding: if this were true to call black Bullfinches
rare feathered varieties (as is sometimes done at bird shows) would be absurd:
as a matter of fact the assertion is probably based largely upon a guess at the
FAMILY CORVIDÆ.
THE Crows are generally characterized by their large size: in the form of
the bill they differ considerably; but it seems to be invariably hard, with
the nostrils at the base, and usually concealed by feathers; the feet are
always strong and scutellated, with powerful curved claws; the middle toe shorter
than the tarsus, the outer and middle toes united at the base and often to the
first joint; the tail has twelve feathers.
The family is represented in the British Isles by five genera:-Pyrrhocorax;
in which the bill is slender, arched, pointed and compressed; the wings graduated,
with the fourth primary longest: Nucifraga; in which the bill is stout, straight,
and with swollen base; the wings graduated, but with the fifth primary counting
from the front of wing longest: Garrulus; with stout compressed bill, straight
at the base; the crown with erectile crest; wings moderately long and rounded,
the fourth to sixth primaries nearly of equal length: Pica; with stout compressed
bill, straight at the base, arched towards the tip, near to which the edge of the
upper mandible is slightly emarginate; the wings short and rounded, with the
fourth or fifth primary longest; the tail very long: Corvus; with bill nearly as
in Pica; the wings long and graduated, with the fourth primary longest.
The Crows are cosmopolitan: according to Seebohm they "are almost omni-
vorous, and are found in most localities, however bare and sterile. They are birds
of powerful, though rather heavy flight, and on the ground walk with ease.
Their notes are harsh and unmusical. They build bulky nests of sticks, moss,
roots, etc., in the branches of trees, on cliffs, and in holes in tree-trunks, walls,
and rocks. Their eggs are from four to eight in number, and vary from almost
white to green, and in one or two instances red, in ground-colour, spotted and
blotched with green of varying degrees of intensity."
As pets the Corvidæ generally are favourites, on account of their intelligence,
the ease with which they can be tamed, their amusing tricks, their general hardiness,
omnivorous tendencies, and lastly the marvellous mimicking powers which some of
them possess: the chief drawbacks to keeping these birds are their natural tendency
to mischief and pilfering when allowed comparative liberty and the labour necessary
to keep them clean when caged: they are best kept separately in small flights-
about three feet high, two feet wide, and seven feet long.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE TWO-BARRED CROSSBILL.
Loxia bifasciata, C. L. BREHM.
HOWARD SAUNDERS gives the following account of the distribution of
this species, and its claims to be regarded as British seem to be well
supported:-It "inhabits the coniferous forests of Northern Russia, and
Siberia, as far as the Pacific; wandering in autumn and winter to South Sweden,
Denmark, Heligoland, North Germany, Holland, Belgium, the North of France,
North Italy, Austria and Poland. In our Islands the first recorded specimen was
obtained near Belfast, Ireland, on May 11th, 1802, and in July or August, 1868,
a second was obtained in co. Dublin. A few years prior to 1843, one was killed
in Cornwall; in the autumn of 1845, a flock appeared in the neighbourhood of
Brampton, in Cumberland, and ten or eleven were shot, six of them being in
female plumage; in May, 1846, two or three were killed from a flock near Bury
St. Edmund's, Suffolk; and about the same time the late H. Doubleday shot a
bird in his garden at Epping. Others have been observed in various parts of
the United Kingdom." (Manual of British Birds, p. 195.) A male was obtained
at Westfield, Sussex, in 1899, and a female at Woodchurch, Kent, in 1902.
The adult male has the feathers of the upper surface of a rose-madder tint,
browner on the back, and inclining to carmine on the rump, the bases of the
feathers broadly black; the wings are black, the greater and median coverts being
broadly tipped with white; the inner secondaries edged with white at their
extremities; tail brownish-black, with rosy-white edges to the feathers; under
surface rose-madder, whitish on the belly, becoming quite white towards the vent;
beak and feet horn-brown; iris hazel. The female above is greenish-grey, washed
with yellow, and streaked with brown; the rump is yellow; under parts sordid
yellow, streaked with brown; the throat and abdomen paler. The young bird is
distinctly greyer than the female, more prominently streaked, with narrower tips
to the median coverts; the flights and tail-feathers with well-defined greenish-
white margins.
The American form of this species (known as the "White-winged Crossbill")
has, on several occasions, been obtained upon our shores; but, considering the
black, slightly tinted with green; bill black; feet horn-yellowish, but densely
covered with fine white feathering; iris hazel. Female similar to the male;
perhaps a trifle smaller. Young birds are smoky-brown above, the rump and
under parts sordid white; the innermost secondaries tipped, and most of the quills
edged with white; the tail shorter and less forked.
Apart from its colouring, this species is easily distinguished on the wing from
the Swallow by the absence of the long tapering points to the outside tail feathers;
but the white rump is also usually very conspicuous.
The Martin arrives in this country about a week later than the Swallow; that
is to say between the middle and end of April, according to the nature of the
season; it usually leaves again between the end of September and beginning of
October, though stragglers have been known to linger even to December.
In its habits and haunts this species much resembles the Swallow: why
Seebohm went out of his way to assert that "its legs are too short to allow it to
walk" I do not understand; for it certainly can not only walk, but run nimbly
for short distances, without erecting its wings; though, if in a hurry, it uses its
wings to assist it in taking surprising leaps. The call-note of the Martin is a
thin whistled sound, something like szeet; the song a modulated twittering.
The House-Martin builds its nest against a wall, and immediately below and
up to a projecting ledge; rectangular eaves of houses are preferred, but sometimes
projecting bricks on railway-and other arches are used, or ledges of rock; the
nest being completely closed in with the exception of a semi-circular or demi-
semi-circular hole at the top, and usually in the centre.
The nest is formed of mud without, and with hardly any admixture of grass
or hair; it is consequently so much more brittle than that of the Swallow, that,
with the greatest care, using a long sharp table-knife, I never succeeded in obtain-
ing a perfect specimen; indeed most nests fall into fragments at the first attempt
to detach them, leaving nothing but the lining with the eggs in the hand held
below as a support: this lining consists of dry grass, and sometimes, but not
invariably, a few feathers. The eggs number from four to six; in form they are
generally elongated ovals, pure white, and immaculate, but appearing rosy when
fresh-laid; they are smooth and thin shelled, moderately glossy, but not exactly
shiny.
When attempting in vain to secure a perfect nest of this species, it has often
surprised me that the mere weight of the nestlings does not burst the fragile mud
shell; the glutinous saliva of the bird is supposed to assist in uniting the mud pellets
in the first instance, but one would expect a driving rain to be more than sufficient
to counteract that slight advantage: why this species so rarely uses hay and hair
Family-MUSCICAPIDÆ.
THE PIED FLYCATCHER.
Muscicapa atricapilla, LINN.
RESPECTING the distribution of this species outside Great Britain, one
cannot do better than quote Howard Saunders:-"A wanderer to the
Faroes, the Pied Flycatcher breeds regularly up to 69° N. lat. in Scan-
dinavia, 65° in Finland, and about 60° in Northern Russia to the Ural Mountains;
southward, in suitable wooded localities, throughout the greater part of Europe,
down to the centre of Spain; and eastward as far as Palestine; while it has been
met with in Northern Persia. In Algeria it is said to be a resident species, its
migrations extending to the Canaries, and down the west side of Africa to the
Gambia, as well as on the east side to Egypt.
In Great Britain this species is far rarer, and much more local than the
Spotted Flycatcher, but especially during the breeding season: although nests
have from time to time been obtained in many of the southern counties of England,
it principally affects the western counties, Wales, and the north, but more partic-
ularly the Lake district; it is said to occur annually in Norfolk, and has occurred
in Rutland and Lincolnshire. In Scotland, and especially in the northern counties, it
is considerably rarer than in England, and in Ireland it has been very seldom
met with.
The adult male in breeding-plumage has the upper parts black, greyer on the
rump, and browner on the wings; the forehead, central coverts, outer borders of
secondaries, and under parts white; bill and feet black; iris dark brown. The
female differs from the male in the browner colouring of the upper parts, and all
the white areas with a buffish stain. The male after its autumn moult more nearly
approaches the female, inasmuch as the black colouring becomes brownish. Young
in nestling plumage have the upper parts spotted with buff, and the under parts
with dark-brown.
The Pied Flycatcher arrives on our coasts towards the end of April, and the
first eggs may usually be obtained by about the middle of the following month,
although some pairs nidificate several weeks later. Unlike its relative the Spotted
Flycatcher, it always nests in a hole, either in a tree, a rock, wall, or bridge,
the top, after which the cock-bird almost invariably took his seeds out there,
clinging head downwards to the wires as he fed: in a few days the Crossbills
became accustomed to their cage, and immediately set to work to do all the
mischief they could. They tore to pieces perch after perch, so that incessant
renewal was necessary; then they began to tear away the woodwork of the cage,
which was anything but pleasing to me, as it had cost me more money than I
could afford to throw away: moreover, they fought for supremacy, and their bad
language at such times was incessant chip-chip-chip. At last the chip of beak and
tongue was more than I could stand, and I greatly desired to be rid of the dear
creatures.
I think it likely that my Crossbills refused to take the trouble to eat apple-
pips, because they were well supplied with sunflower-seed, with which the were
perfectly satisfied. On the 6th February, 1887, I removed the Crossbills from
their large wooden-framed flight-cage to a much smaller metal prison (such is
sometimes used for Canaries); two clays later the cock-bird discovered how to
open the door; and, after carefully shutting it behind him, flew up to the roof
of the greenhouse in which the cage was hung, and amused himself by walking
about on the creepers head downwards. It was quite three-quarters of an hour
before he could be again secured in his cage, and he used his mandibles to some
purpose upon his captor. The door of the cage was now fastened with wire, to
prevent another exhibition of the bird's skill as a prison-breaker. On the morning
of the 9th the cock-bird died, apparently out of pique, for we could discover no
cause for his death, his organs being all in perfect condition; but possibly he
may have been squeezed when captured: the following day the hen had a fit and
followed his example. Thus my hope of exchanging my Crossbills for some less
destructive species were disappointed.
One advantage in this bird is-that however wild it may be, and however
intolerable the odour of its cage may be, the bird always appears to enjoy robust
health. Even if one is ill, and perchance no fresh food is supplied to this bird
for twenty-four hours, he makes no trouble of that, but only attacks his food more
vigorously when the opportunity comes. Moreover, having by foolish behaviour
so reduced his wings that he cannot reach his perch, he contentedly passes the
night on a box in a corner. These are redeeming points in his character.
Family-LANIIDÆ.
THE WOODCHAT SHRIKE.
Lanius pomeranus, SPARRM.
HOWARD SAUNDERS observes that "On the Continent the Woodchat
breeds as far to the north-east as the line of the Baltic and the valley of
the Vistula, beyond which it is of accidental occurrence; while southward
it is generally distributed throughout Europe, and in the countries bordering on
the Mediterranean is very abundant. Even there, however, it is only a visitor;
arriving about the end of March, or early in April, and leaving again between
August and October. Eastward it breeds in South Russia, Turkey, Asia Minor,
Palestine, and Persia; while in winter it occurs in Arabia, and down the East
African Coast to about 5° N. lat., also on the west side to the Gambia and the
Gold Coast. Throughout Northern Africa it is abundant in summer, arriving from
the southern side of the Sahara in March."
To Great Britain this species is an irregular straggler, and principally on
migration; nevertheless about thirty-seven examples have been obtained in various
parts of England, chiefly in the southern and eastern counties, one male was seen
in May 1903 at Speeton, in Yorkshire, and, on two occasions, it has been recorded
as breeding at Freshwater, in the Isle of Wight.
fourth generation (Vide Gefiederte Welt, Vol. XX, p. 289) is not very surprising:
the only question is whether the Doctor was justified in speaking of them as
"Bastarde." Mr. H. C. Martin, of Old Charlton, bred three crosses between the
Serin and Canary in 1896, and kindly gave a female to me, so that I hoped to be
able to repeat Dr. Russ' experience but was unsuccessful.
Mr. Septimus Perkins in the "Avicultural Magazine," Vol. II, pp. 152-3,
gives his experience of the Serin in captivity; he says:-"The Serin Finch is
not expensive to buy, but is not always to be obtained when wanted. A good
many, however, are generally brought over from Germany in the autumn, and it
is then that the wary aviculturist will purchase a pair or two, with which he may
hope to breed the following year.
Canary and German rape-seed, with the daily addition of a little hemp, suit
the Serin Finch best as a diet. I have always found him most inoffensive towards
his companions in the aviary, a tame, confiding little bird, and, to my mind,
singularly attractive, in spite of his sober colours.
My pair of Serins were bought in the autumn, when they were in very
shabby plumage and not the best of health. In due time they improved greatly
in both respects, but became, unfortunately, a great deal too fat. In May of the
following year the hen began to build, selecting a corner of the aviary, on the
floor of the room, as a nesting place; although the aviary abounded with more
suitable spots, there being nesting boxes of various sorts and abundance of bushes.
The nest was a neatly formed but flimsy edifice, rather hastily put together, and
the three pretty eggs rolled out, one by one, upon the floor a day or two after
the hen began to sit. She stuck to her nest so long as an egg remained in it;
but when the last rolled out, she gave up in despair. No other nest was built."
I do not doubt that if a Hartz cage had been hanging on the wall, the Serin
would have built inside it, and reared her brood: the common Canary in an
aviary prefers this to anything else, and when it is not present, builds in a bush
or a bundle of twigs.
Ornithologists have long differed in opinion as to whether the specimens of
the wild Canary which have from time to time been caught and killed on our
coasts are stragglers to Great Britain or escaped cage-birds; Seebohm insisted
that they were the former, because they showed no evidence of having been in
captivity, although the same might be said of most birds which have been care-
fully attended to in spacious aviaries. Howard Saunders did not hesitate to regard
them as freed captives, observing that "although cages-full are known to be
imported, there are persons who wish to believe that the individuals captured are
not escaped birds, but stragglers from a warm to an inhospitable climate." Here
The Missel Thrush is supposed to have bred on Stornoway, Outer Hebrides,
since 1902, and is believed to be increasing in Ireland.
White's Thrush was again shot in Yorkshire (near Halifax), December 18th,
1902.
The Blackbird now breeds in the extreme west of Ireland.
The Ring-Ouzel is said to have nested near Osborne, Isle of Wight, in 1906.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-TURDINÆ.
THE BLACK-EARED WHEATEAR.
Saxicola stapazina, LINN.
A male was shot near Polegate, Sussex, on May 28th, 1902, and on May 24th
1905, another was shot near Hoo, Sussex; on the 9th September of the
same year, a third was shot near Pett, Sussex; a male was shot at
Winchelsea on May 2nd, 1907. The name stapazina was given in error, by Mr.
Howard Saunders, to the Black-throated species, which should now stand as
Saxicola occidentalis.
A male of the Desert Wheatear Saxicola deserti was captured at the lighthouse
(Pentland Skerries), on June 2nd, 1906.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-TURDINÆ.
THE SIBERIAN STONECHAT.
Pratincola maura, PALL.
A male was shot near Cley, Norfolk, on September 2nd, 1904.
Lord Lilford observes:-"In the few instances in which, * * * *, we met
with this bird in the highlands of Inverness-shire, we found it exceedingly tame,
running about within a few yards of us, and feeding on the seeds of various
grasses which grew by the burn-sides; in one instance the bird was so confiding
that I nearly caught it with my cap; but this was no doubt caused by the fact
that a Merlin was hunting over the moss at the moment when the 'Snow-flake,'
as this bird is often called, fluttered up at our feet. The call-note of this species
is pleasing and musical, and the male has an agreeable song, which, however, I
have only heard from a caged bird. In captivity the Snow-Bunting will eat
almost any sort of seed, and generally dies of plethora unless strictly dieted."
(Birds of Northamptonshire, Vol. I, pp. 171-172),
Mr. Saxby speaking of them in Shetland, says:-"Seen against a dark hill-
side or a lowering sky, a flock of these birds presents an exceedingly beautiful
appearance, and it may then be seen how aptly the term "Snowflake" has been
applied to the species. I am acquainted with no more pleasing combination of
sight and sound than that afforded when a number of these birds, backed by a
dark grey sky, drop as it were in a shower to the ground, to the music of their
own sweet tinkling notes." (Zoologist, p. 9484).
The nidification of the Snow-Bunting is late; most nests being apparently
obtainable in June and July, although in Iceland it nests as early as May; it
chooses heaps of stones, crevices in rocks or behind boulders, or piles of drift-
wood in which to build.
The nest is bulky and constructed of dry grass, rootlets, sometimes birch or
other twigs, and a little moss: it is lined with down, hair, and a quantity of feathers.
The eggs number from four to eight; six or seven being (according to Seebohm)
a usual clutch. Both in size and colouring they vary considerably, the ground-
colour being creamy or greyish-white, or pale greenish, spotted and blotched with
chocolate, and occasionally striated with blackish; the shell-markings are pale
reddish-brown and lavender; most of the markings are usually collected towards
or at the larger extremity.
The food during the breeding-season consists largely of insects, but at other
times all kinds of seed are eaten, as well as corn. John Cordeaux says (Birds of
the Humber District):-"The little Snow-flake will find food and thrive in the
severest winters, after all our small feathered friends have been driven by frost and
snow from the cold and exposed marshes, feeding on the seeds of various grasses
picked from the withered bents rising above the carpet of snow. They are nearly
always excessively fat." "Roosts generally amongst rough grass on the pastures."
During incubation, the male bird is in full song, its notes being heard both
Family-CORVIDÆ.
THE RAVEN.
Corvus corax, LINN.
DISTRIBUTED throughout Europe from the limit of land in the north to
the Mediterranean in the south and throughout northern Asia to the
Himalayas; whilst in America it extends across the continent from the
Pacific to Greenland and southwards to Guatemala and possibly Honduras, though
to the east of the Mississippi it is somewhat rare and local.
In England, probably owing to the systematic persecution to which it has
been subjected, the Raven is becoming very rare, though a few pairs still breed
regularly in the rocky headlands of our southern and south-western coasts.
Howard Saunders observes that nests built in trees, although far rarer than
formerly, are less uncommon than might be supposed at short distances inland.
Not long ago several pairs bred in Essex. To this I can add that in the winter
of 1885-6 a pair of Ravens used daily to pass over my garden at Penge (where I
then lived) and on mentioning the fact to a friend in the train he told me he
knew of a pair which had a nest in the spring of 1885 not far from Beckenham,
but he intended to keep its situation to himself, lest I should be tempted to try
and secure the eggs.
In Scotland, and particularly the Outer Hebrides and other Western Isles
northwards to the Shetlands, it is still common; whilst it is found in the wilder
regions of Ireland.
The Raven is glossy black, with iridescent purple and Prussian blue tints on
the upper parts and throat; bill and feet black, iris brown. The female is
smaller, and less distinctly shot with purple and blue; her bill is slightly shorter.
The young resemble the female, but lack the metallic gloss of adult birds.
The bird of Odin is widely regarded with superstitious awe; its sable
colouring, gruff croaking notes, and its delight in carrion, however foul and
putrid, have doubtless conspired to stamp it as a bird of evil omen; yet, to watch
a pair of Ravens at play, gives one no feeling of horror or disgust; for their
foolish antics and absurd lateral jumps are irresistibly laughable.
In contradiction to the statement of Mr. C. A. Wright respecting the shyness
of the Woodchat, excepting when defending its young, Lord Lilford's observations
are interesting; for he states that the "Woodchat is a very familiar and fearless
bird, and seems often to prefer the vicinity of human habitations for its nest. In
all its habits this Shrike seems to me to approach closely to the Fly-catchers."
Seebohm also says of L. pomeranus (which, however, in common with most Ornith-
ologists, he calls L. rufus) "It is not a wary bird, and, with due precaution, may
be quite closely approached." It is, therefore, probable that this species would not
be difficult to tame, if kindly treated.
Family-LANIIDÆ.
THE MASKED SHRIKE.
Lanius nubicus, LICHT.
A MALE specimen of this bird was shot at Woodchurch, Kent, on July 11th,
1905. Its native country is south-eastern Europe and Asia Minor: it
winters in north-east Africa and Senegambia.
to be the case with Pycnonotus leucotis the Persian specimens of which have a fine
variable liquid song, whereas the smaller examples found in N.W. India are very
poor singers. Judging by Jerdon's account, the Crested Lark of India can be
little inferior to the Mongolian or Tientsin Lark, the song of which, though it
contains some harsh scolding notes, is exceedingly amusing and in some of its
phrases really fine. My advice to aviculturists would, therefore, be, not to accept
Mr. Rausch's decision as final; but, if they desire to keep the Crested Lark,
import it from India, or even from Pekin, where according to Pére David (P.Z.S.
1871, p. 390) it is resident and common, as it also is in Mongolia.
In India this bird, according to Jerdon (cf. Cat. Birds, E. Ind. Comp.,
vol. II, p. 466) "feeds on various insects, chiefly grasshoppers, and in default of
this food, on grain and seeds." This supports the statement made by Seebohm:
-"The food of the Crested Lark does not differ from that of its congeners. In
the spring and summer it is chiefly composed of insects and larvæ, and in the
autumn and winter of various small seeds and grain." It is exactly what one
would expect. In captivity it should have soft food, seeds (Canary and millet),
also insects, mealworms, etc.
Family-ALAUDIDÆ.
THE WHITE-WINGED LARK.
Melanocorypha sibirica, GMEL.
THIS species was admitted into the British list in consequence of a female
having been captured alive near Brighton, on November 22nd, 1869, and
exhibited by Mr. G. Dawson Rowley at a meeting of the Zoological
Society, held Jan. 27th, 1870. It is a common Russian species; and, by anyone
acquainted with the allied Mongolian Lark, is exceedingly likely to have been
boiled egg, hemp-seed, bread-crumbs, carrots, potatoes, and ants' eggs; they drink
a great deal, but seldom wash, and I have more than once seen a Waxwing delib-
erately eat its own fæces, though it was abundantly supplied with many varieties
of food; none of these birds ever became tame with me, and I shall certainly
never buy any of them again."
Seebohm gives them much the same character:-"They were most voracious
eaters, and the cage required cleaning several times a day. They were very active
and restless, and even when perched at rest seemed to be continually moving their
heads. If alarmed they would stretch out their necks to almost double the usual
length."
On the other hand Swaysland (Cassell's Cage-birds, p. 340) says:-"It is
easily tamed, and in the aviary is docile and quiet. It should be fed upon German
paste, sponge-cake, a little hard-boiled egg, Juniper berries, soaked grocers' currants,
or any other soft-skinned fruit." I think it quite likely that, associated with birds
of its own size in an aviary, the Waxwing would become far more easily reconciled
to captivity, would eat less, bathe more frequently, and keep in better health, than
in a cage: moreover, I should certainly not recommend either raw meat or
grocers' currants to be given to it as articles of food.
FAMILY MUSCICAPIDÆ.
THIS large family of birds was not even regarded by Seebohm as a distinct
Subfamily, but was included by him in the Turdinæ; yet it forms a very
characteristic group: the bills of Flycatchers are somewhat flattened and
broad at the base, compressed and somewhat curved towards the point; the rictal
bristles which, in insectivorous birds serve to prevent the escape of winged insects
from the base of the bill, are very strongly developed, and numerous in this family.
The Flycatchers, as their name indicates, are rapid flyers, and consequently
have long pointed wings; their eyes also are large and full; they perch mostly
on trees, very rarely descending to the earth; their feet, as might be anticipated,
are small, the middle toe being considerably longer than the lateral ones.
hatched, the three young birds would have been able to sit comfortably in the
pipe, and it is doubtful whether they could have easily escaped from it.
Nidification lasts from April to June; in mild seasons the first nests being
commenced towards the end of March; two broods are sometimes reared in a year,
and it is not very rare to find two hens in charge of one nest, in which case
seven, eight, or even more eggs will be found together:* this I have proved on
more than one occasion, but only in the case of nests built under thatching, where
I flushed both hens from the same hole, as I rested my ladder against the roof,
and putting in my hand felt the whole of the double clutch in the one depression:
so far as I could make out, only one male owned the nest and its two occupants.
The food of the Starling consists during the breeding-season of worms, slugs,
leather-jackets (the larvæ of crane-flies) and many other destructive grubs; also
of spiders and various insects; indeed these are always eaten when procurable,
but in autumn fruit and the softer berries are devoured, whilst in winter hips
and haws, and seeds of many kinds, as well as all kinds of household scraps are
greedily swallowed.
In the autumn Starlings collect into immense flocks, consisting of hundreds
of thousands, if not millions of individuals; as they pass overhead, wheeling in
an immense circle, the sound of their wings is like the rushing of water, and the
earth is darkened below as by a heavy passing cloud. I have seen two or three
of these vast assemblages following one another and wheeling incessantly over a
large park in Kent; and, when at length they drew out into a long continuous
belt and gradually settled, the trees were black with birds.
In captivity the Starling rapidly becomes friendly and is always amusing, but
he is a ravenous bird with a powerful digestion, and, therefore, needs constant
attention if kept in a cage: an aviary is the place in which to see him to perfec-
tion: there he is always perfect in plumage excepting when moulting, for he is
constantly bathing and preening his feathers.
I reared my first nest of young Starlings in May, 1887, feeding them on a
moistened mixture of oat-flour and pea-meal: they were no trouble to rear, but
very noisy, greedy, and quarrelsome. When full grown one of these birds used
to spend nearly the whole day in turning back-somersaults from the top perch of
his cage to the bottom one, or to the floor, and back again: I used to wonder
whether it had a diseased brain, but it seemed quite sensible in other respects:
another of these birds distinguished itself by singing incessantly right up to
November: its performance consisted of a comical jumble of chuckling sounds,
mixed with a few Canary notes and the alarm-chatter of the Blackbird: it also
The nests of the Flycatchers are open, and more or less cup-shaped in
character; they are frequently placed in holes or crevices in trees, rocks, or walls;
but some of the species build upon thick branches, or even in the forks of branches;
the eggs of the different species vary considerably in character, some being heavily
spotted, and others spotless.*
The flight is undulating; the song low-pitched, and not of great merit; the
food consists mainly of insects, but is supplemented occasionally by a little fruit.
Formerly the limits of this group of birds were much more extended than at
present; Jerdon even included the Blue-throats, and expressed it as his opinion
that the Tyrants of the New World belonged to the family: Seebohm observed
that-"The Flycatchers inhabit the Palæarctic, Oriental, and Ethiopian regions,
extending southwards to the Moluccas, but not occurring in the Australian region.
Four species are found in Europe, of which two breed in the British Islands, and
one is an accidental visitor." The latter, at the time when his "British Birds"
appeared, had only occurred here three times, but of late years other examples
have been obtained.
Family-MUSCICAPIDÆ.
THE SPOTTED FLYCATCHER.
Muscicapa grisola, LINN.
HOWARD SAUNDERS states that this species "breeds as far north as
Tromsö, in Norway, and Archangel, in Russia; while southward it is
tolerably abundant throughout Europe, nesting down to the northern shores
of the Mediterranean; also on the African side, and in Asia Minor, Palestine,
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE LITTLE BUNTING.
Emberiza pusilla, PALLAS.
ONE specimen was captured near Brighton, on November 2nd, 1864; a female
was secured in Durham and a male in Warwick in 1902, one was caught
by a cat in Scotland in 1903, an example was seen at Fair Isle in 1905,
and a female secured in 1906; all these examples were met with in October.
At best it can only be regarded as a rare and chance wanderer to Great
Britain, although there is no reason why it should not occasionally visit us.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE REED-BUNTING.
Emberiza schæniclus, LINN.
FREQUENTLY, though incorrectly, called Black-headed Bunting, Reed
Sparrow, Water Sparrow, and Mountain Sparrow; also well-known under
the popular name of Black-bonnet, is distributed over the whole of Europe
from the North Cape to the Mediterranean, as well as in Western Siberia; but
it is only a summer visitor to the more northern parts of its range, and chiefly a
winter visitor to the extreme south; at this season it is also met with in Asia
Minor and North Africa. Races of this species occurring in the south of Europe,
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE COMMON CROSSBILL.
Loxia curvirostra, LINN.
ACCORDING to Dr. R. Bowdler Sharpe, this species inhabits "the greater
part of Europe and Northern Asia, to Japan and North China, Himalayas,
North America as far as Mexico.
In Great Britain, the Crossbill is principally confined during the summer
months to the pine forests of Scotland; though it has bred in several of the
eastern counties of Ireland, and in Tipperary, as well as in North Wales and
some of the counties of England: here, however, it is most frequently met with
during the winter, sometimes in flocks, though often only in small parties.
In colouring this species nearly resembles the Two-barred Crossbill, excepting
in the absence of the white tips to the greater and median wing-coverts: perhaps
the male is a little less brilliant in colour, and the female a little more orange;
but as these birds vary in these respects with age, it is not safe to speak positively:
one thing is certain-that, in captivity the red colouring is entirely lost after the
first moult; but whether permanently it is not safe to say without experimenting,
inasmuch as many birds, notably the American Nonpareil (Cyanospiza ciris) lose
their red colouring in the same manner; yet the Nonpareil, at any rate if
exposed in an airy and sunny aviary for a year or two, and supplied with plenty
of insect-food, reproduces the red colouring. The mandibles of the young bird
are straight, the lower mandible being covered by the cutting edges of the upper;
but in the adult birds it curves upwards towards the tip, that of the male (in
the ordinary variety) barely reaching to a level with the culmen of the upper
mandible, on the inside if viewed from above; that of the female, which has much
the longer, less arched, and more slender beak, projecting well above the culmen
on the outside. This different crossing of the mandibles in the sexes probably
enables the male to feed the female; otherwise it is difficult to understand its
object.*
The Crossbill is an irregular migrant; consequently if food is scarce in the
north, it wanders southward to search for sustenance there: in winter the species
Afghanistan, and the Himalayas, and is found in suitable localities throughout
the rest of Eastern Asia, including Japan, Formosa, Hainan, and Java."
The distribution of this species in Great Britain is imperfectly known, owing
to its general resemblance to the House-Sparrow and its comparative rarity, but
it is believed to be most abundant in the eastern and midland counties of England,
and the eastern counties of Scotland: in Ireland it was not discovered until 1852,
but is steadily extending its range and increasing in numbers. A colony is said
to have existed at Belmullet since 1902; another was discovered near Killala in
1907; a pair nested in Co. Deny in 1906; in Donegal four nests with eggs were
found in 1907, and a single bird was seen in Sligo the same year.
It is believed that in the autumn the numbers of our resident Tree-Sparrows
are largely added to, by flocks of immigrants from the north; many hundreds
arriving on our east coast, in company with Greenfinches, during October and
November.
The Tree-Sparrow chiefly differs from the House-Sparrow in its slightly inferior
size, chestnut crown and nape, a white-bordered triangular black patch on the ear-
coverts, a second white bar across the wing; and in the fact that the female
scarcely differs from the male. Young birds have the black markings replaced
by brown, and the wing bauds suffused with buff.
During the summer months this species in our islands differs somewhat in its
habits from those on the Continent, seeming to avoid towns and the larger villages,
and (according to Seebohm) chiefly haunting "the fields and wilder districts away
from houses"; but curiously enough the whole of the nests which I have taken,
both in Kent and Norfolk, were found in holes in trees within a stone's throw of
at least one house, and sometimes at a distance of only a few yards. "On the
Continent, however," (says Seebohm) "the bird has so far overcome its shyness,
and adapted itself to circumstances as to frequent the towns, and is quite as pert
and impudent as its congener, which it otherwise resembles in its habits."
As a site for its nest the Tree-Sparrow seems to prefer holes in pollard
willows when obtainable, and, more often than not, the selected hole is at the top
of the stump, though I have also taken it out of a hollow and decayed lateral
branch, about five feet from the ground: in Norfolk all the nests I found were
in willows; but in Kent I took one nest from a hole in the front of an old oak-
tree facing the road, whilst Lord Lilford says that in Northamptonshire they "are
to be found nesting generally in small colonies of three or four pairs in old
hollow trees, especially (in our neighbourhood) decayed ash, willows, and walnuts."
Yarrell speaks of the species as building "in the thatch of a barn, in company
with the House-Sparrow, not, however, entering the thatch from the inside of the
however, he told me he was quite certain that it was a Wood-Lark, so I gave him
the money: he hurried off so quickly that I doubted again; and, taking it in-
doors to the light, I discovered that the bird was a hen Sky-Lark whose tail had
been pulled out and had half-grown again. I could not help laughing, but I
never bought a bird from that man afterwards.
The egg figured on the plate is from Mr. A. B. Farn's collection.
Family-ALAUDIDÆ.
THE CRESTED LARK.
Alauda cristata, LINN.
RESIDENT in Central and Southern Europe, its northern range extending
up to 60° N. lat. in Russia and Sweden; North Africa, southward to
Senegambia and the Niger on the west coast, and from Abyssinia east-
ward, through Arabia and India, to North China.
To Great Britain this species appears to be a rare straggler: most examples
have been obtained in Cornwall, one in summer and the four others in autumn
and winter; one is said to have been caught in the Isle of Wight, and two have
been obtained in Sussex. The statements-that one has been taken from a nest
in the Isle of Wight, and that it has occurred in Ireland, require verification.*
It is also reported from Blackheath and Macclesfield.
There are many slight climatic modifications of this Lark, all of which
have been regarded either as species or subspecies. The typical form has the
upper parts greyish-brown, with darker centres to the feathers, excepting on the
rump and upper tail-coverts, which are sandy-brown; the long pointed crest has
The favourite haunts of the Swallow are country villages, hamlets, or even
isolated houses, and cottages; but it rarely penetrates far into the larger towns.
It places its nest in various situations-on joists of barns, out-houses, boat-houses,
in which case the form of the nest varies from an oval to a half-, or quarter-cup;
against perpendicular walls under eaves of barns*; inside chimneys, wells, and
mines; in corners of pillared porticoes to large houses; under rustic bridges; cases
have even been recorded of nests built in a hole in a tree about thirty feet from
the ground, and in the forking branch of a sycamore. In its wild state in
mountainous or rocky localities this bird naturally builds against the sides of cliffs
under overhanging ledges of rock, or in caves; but in Great Britain it usually
seeks the habitations of men for nesting-sites.
The nest is always open above; the walls thick, and formed of mud-pellets
mixed with straw, hay, or hair; the lining consists of fine grass-stems, usually
almost concealed by a quantity of feathers, though in some instances these are
absent.
As is usually the case with nests more or less exposed to light from above,
the eggs are not wholly white and immaculate, the ground-colour is pure white,
appearing rosy when not incubated; speckled, spotted, and occasionally heavily
blotched with deep pitchy brown, often intermixed with sienna reddish spots, and
with lavender-grey shell-spots; in some eggs the spots are small and tolerably
evenly distributed over the entire surface, sometimes they are larger, and principally
collected at the larger end; sometimes there is an imperfect zone of spots, and
even large blotches near the larger end: some eggs are elongated ovals, others
short and well-formed.
The Swallow when approaching its nest always utters a plaintive warning
note, the intention of which doubtless is, to call the attention of its young to its
advent; but this call is uttered even before the eggs are deposited, and is continued
after the nest has been robbed: this has given the impression to unobservant
persons that the parents mourn over the loss of their possessions.
Seebohm asserts that the Swallow builds a fresh nest every year; but I have
proved conclusively that, when built under the shelter of a portico, where it is
protected from wet, the same nest is sometimes used for three consecutive years;
indeed I have in my collection a nest with the clutches of eggs which it contained
in June 1881 and 1883: in 1882 I was forbidden to touch the eggs because the
lady of the house said "the poor birds cried every time they approached the nest"†
FAMILY AMPELIDÆ.
FORMERLY this constituted a fairly large group, including even such distinct
looking birds as the members of the genus Liothrix, birds moreover which,
in their habits nearly resemble our Accentors: I believe, however, that the
relationship of the Liothrix to Accentor is now recognized. Jerdon even included
the Tits, as well as the White-eyes and Accentors, in the same family.
Seebohm, who only admitted one family for the Passeres, necessarily regarded
the present group as a Subfamily "consisting of birds having the wing of a
Starling, the foot of a Shrike, and a bill intermediate between that of a Shrike
and a Swallow. They are probably most nearly allied to the Shrikes and the
Starlings: from the former they may at once be distinguished by the minuteness
of their bastard primary, their short tarsus, and their nearly obsolete rictal bristles.
Ornithologists are perhaps justified in placing them in a distinct Subfamily, in
consequence of the shortness of their tarsus, their shorter, wider, and notched beak,
and the presence of small bristles which cover the nostrils." (Hist. British Birds,
Vol. II, p. 1).
Although the species of Ampelis have somewhat the flight of a Starling, they
build open nests in the branches of trees; and, in their actions, somewhat resemble
Tits. In all probability they are more nearly related to the Shrikes than to any
other group of British birds; but they are not predaceous like that murderous
family, being insectivorous and frugivorous, and they appear to have little idea of
song.
Of late years Waxwings have been somewhat largely kept as cage birds; but,
in spite of their beauty, they are anything but pleasing pets, their lack of vocal
merit, and their greediness, which results in a perpetual dirty condition of their
cages, are great drawbacks.
she is also darker above, more prominently streaked below, and wants the rose-
colouring on the rump, the throat, and breast. The young chiefly differ from the
female in the lack of crimson on the forehead, and in the more sandy colouring
of the upper parts.
In confinement, the crimson and rosy colouring entirely disappears after the
first moult, excepting in large and well ventilated aviaries, when it is sometimes
partially retained: this statement also applies to the Lesser Redpoll, the Twite,
and the Linnet.
In its habits, this and all the Redpolls are much alike, restless, fidgety little
creatures, Tit-like in their actions, inquisitive, and mischievous; but intelligent,
and, therefore, easy to teach all kinds of meaningless tricks: principally on account
of the last qualification they have become favourite cage-birds with that class of
persons which is charmed with what is unnatural. To the true lover of nature
a talking bird may be amusing, because it is the nature of many birds to imitate
sounds; but a performing bird is offensive.
Seebohm (Hist. British Birds, Vol. II, pp. 118-119) has some interesting
observations on the habits of this species, both abroad and in this country, which
are worth noting. He says that in winter they are principally ground-feeders,
which we should have expected to be the case from what we know of Linnets and
Goldfinches; like which birds they "alight in a flock on a bed of dead thistles,"
and amuse themselves by picking them to pieces. He also records the fact of
their picking seeds from the droppings of horses on the roads; which is instructive,
as showing that they look upon oats and kindred grain as wholesome food; a
fact which aviculture taught me many years ago.
The nest of the Mealy Redpoll is usually placed in the fork of a birch-tree
at no great height from the ground, it has also been found in grass-tussocks; it
is neatly constructed of twigs, bents, strips of bark, and lichens, or moss; the
lining of willow-catkins, vegetable-down, hair, wool, and sometimes feathers. The
eggs number from five to six, and vary in colour from pale greenish to
pale bluish, with dark brown surface-spots, and paler red-brown underlying
markings.
Although there is no satisfactory evidence to prove that the Mealy Redpoll
has ever bred in Great Britain, a male in breeding-plumage was observed at
Riddlesworth, in July, 1848, and noticed by Prof. Alfred Newton in the "Zoologist"
(p. 2382); still this bird may possibly have escaped from an out-door aviary after
a few months confinement.
The song of this species, if such it can be called, is merely a prolonged
trill, such as may be imitated either by vibrating the soft palate as you whistle,
what one notices between the sexes of many butterflies. The different form of
the wing in the sexes of birds appears rarely to be noted, the mere length being
recorded. The radius and ulna in the male are longer and the depression in front
of their junction with the humerus deeper than in the female, the primary coverts
are less exposed in the male, whilst the second, third, and fourth longer primaries are
emarginate in front, in the male; but only the second and third, in the female;
in the latter sex the primaries are more perfectly graded, whereas in the male
the outer edge forms a slight sinus; the tail differs much in outline, as will be
at once seen from the cut.
Young birds are very like the female. After the autumn moult the feathers
of the crown and breast have greyish borders, the crimson being dull and presenting
a mottled appearance; this (in fully adult males) gradually changes to the bright
colouring at the approach of spring.*
This species, which is variously called the Grey, Brown, or Red Linnet,
according to the age or plumage of the specimens so named, during the summer
again, the same might be said of other species with equal fairness, yet I think
he may have been correct.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE SISKIN.
Chrysomitris spinus, LINN.
THE distribution of the Siskin or Aberdevine* extends throughout Europe to
the limit of conifer growth: in Africa it is said to occur during severe
winters in Morocco and Algeria; it is also found in Northern Asia, and
across Siberia to China and Japan.
In Great Britain during the summer months the Siskin is chiefly confined to
the fir-woods of the north, consequently it is somewhat local in its distribution;
in some parts of Scotland and Ireland it is fairly abundant as a breeding species,
as also in some of the northern counties of England: it has, moreover, been
known occasionally to breed in Surrey, Sussex, and I am tolerably sure that it
has bred at Keston, in Kent, near to the lakes, where there is a belt of tall
conifers, for I saw a pair there early in June, 1886, and heard the male singing
its sprightly song, with the unmistakeable hurdy-gurdy finish. Since 1898 it has
been recorded as breeding in Shropshire, Derby, Yorkshire and probably Suther-
land. In the winter the distribution of the Siskin is much more general, extending
into Western Scotland and the South of England.
The adult male has the general colouring of the upper parts olive-green with
darker shaft-streaks, the rump much more yellow, showing the shaft-streaks
distinctly at the junction with the lower part of the back; crown of head black;
wings black, the coverts tipped with yellow, the flights with white diffused borders
this character alone, which was first pointed out to me by Mr. Joseph Abrahams,
I have never yet failed to correctly pair up the sexes of birds for breeding
purposes, where no assistance could be gained by a study of the plumage. I am,
therefore, certain that its importance has not been appreciated by Ornithologists.
In his account of the Nutcracker, Seebohm takes the late Rev. F. O. Morris
somewhat too seriously: there is no doubt that when the latter gentleman compiled
his work on British Birds, he was unable to discover any facts relating to the
nidification of our species, and, therefore, fell back upon the nesting habits of the
genus as given in Jerdon's Birds of India, where we read-"They breed in holes
in trees, which they excavate, or enlarge, with their powerful Woodpecker-like
bills," etc., and doubtless when the revised edition was published in 1870, Mr.
Morris had not discovered that a genuine description of the nest had been pub-
lished in 1862, which differed in all points from that accepted by Dr. Jerdon.
In June, 1862, Professor Newton exhibited the nest and fully fledged young
of this species at a meeting of the Zoological Society of London: he had received
them from Pastor Theobald, and J. C. H. Fisher, of Copenhagen, who had taken
them in Bornholm. At that time they had failed to secure eggs of the species.
At a meeting in January, 1867, Professor Newton exhibited a nest with four eggs,
observing:-"In 1863, my friends were again disappointed of getting the eggs of
this bird, which proved to be a still earlier breeder than they had given it credit
for; and on the 9th of April three young ones were found. In 1864 they deter-
mined to 'be wise in time.' They kept two young men on the watch all the
winter, and as spring approached careful search was made. At length, on the
23rd of March, after eight days' labour, the nest was found, in the same part of
the forest as the nest of the year before, being indeed only some fifty feet from
the same spot. It was, therefore, in all probability, built by the same pair of
birds. It was in a fir tree, about fifty feet high, and built quite in the same
manner as that of the former year. The seeker took the precaution first to climb
up a near-extending tree, and then, seeing the Nutcracker on the nest, ascended
the nest-tree itself and took the four eggs, which, when sent to Herr Theobald,
were blown by him and found to be quite fresh."
In 1865, owing to the severity of the preceding winter, these gentlemen did
not receive a nest quite so early, their seekers only discovering one containing
three eggs on the 10th of April; but they secured a second, with four eggs, on
the 30th of the same month: finally, in March 1866, a nest with one egg was
found, but the birds deserted it without laying again. Seebohm observes that
"the breeding-season of the Nutcracker in the Arctic regions is evidently June
and July-at least ten weeks later than in Central Europe."
Family-MOTACILLIDÆ.
THE BLACK-HEADED WAGTAIL.
Motacilla melanocephala, LICHT.
A male was shot near Willingdon, on May 13th, 1906; it is also a race of
M. flava, as are the two following.
Family-MOTACILLIDÆ.
SYKES' WAGTAIL.
Motacilla beema, SYKES.
A male was obtained at Rottingdean, Sussex, on April 20th, 1898.
Family-MOTACILLIDÆ.
THE ASHY-HEADED WAGTAIL.
Motacilla cinereocapilla, SAVI.
THE first example was shot many years ago near Penzance, and a second at
Sheringham, Norfolk (in May ?) 1842.
I cannot say I have much faith in the distinctness of the above, even as sub-
species, from M. flava, but the tendency amongst Ornithologists nowadays is to
split hairs; if it amuses them I do not object.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE YELLOW-BREASTED BUNTING.
Emberiza aureola, PALLAS.
AN immature female was shot at Cley, Norfolk, in September 1905. It has
occurred at Heligoland, North Italy and south-eastern France.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE CIRL BUNTING.
Emberiza cirlus, LINN.
THE range of the Cirl Bunting is more restricted than that of the other
European species as it does not extend into the northern parts of the
Continent. In Central and Southern Europe it is resident, but in Southern
Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor, it seeks the mountains for breeding purposes. In
Belgium and Holland it is said to be rare. It has been found breeding in Algeria,
but appears to be chiefly a winter visitor to North-west Africa.
Though resident in Great Britain and not rare, the Cirl Bunting is decidedly
local, being essentially a southern species. Formerly every work on British
Birds which was published, used to assert that this bird was found breeding in
all the southern counties from Cornwall to Sussex, being apparently absent from
rather pleasing:-The adult male has the head of a cinnamon-brown colour, a line
round the base of the bill, the lores, chin, and throat, black; the nape is smoky
grey; the back and scapulars dull chestnut, somewhat paler on the rump, and
becoming rather yellower on the upper tail-coverts; wings bluish-black, the median
coverts white; the quills with a white patch near the middle of their inner webs,
gradually increasing on the inner feathers, and tipped with blue; the tail-coverts
cinnamon-brown, much elongated; tail feathers black, white at the extremity of
the inner webs: under surface of body pale Dove-brown, fading to white on the
under tail-coverts; beak in summer bluish-grey, darker at the tip; in winter
brownish flesh-coloured; feet flesh-coloured; iris whitish. The female is duller
in colour, with the white markings less pure. The young are without black on
the throat, or grey on the nape; the head is also yellower, and the under surface
of the body whiter; the mantle is mottled, and the breast and flanks are barred
with dark brown.
The Hawfinch is resident with us; but it is probable that at least some of
the young leave our shores at the approach of winter, their places being taken by
immigrants from the north: in the autumn they not infrequently fly into the
nets of the birdcatchers, and are disposed of at very moderate prices. During the
summer months the Hawfinch is an exceedingly shy bird, and is far more frequently
heard than seen; its call-note, consisting of a whistle four times repeated, and
drawn out at the finish, being familiar to most frequenters of its haunts; the
harsh Greenfinch-like sound, sometimes mistaken for its call-note, is probably its
cry of defiance. The song is a very inferior performance of short duration, some-
what like that of an inferior Greenfinch.
The Hawfinch frequents well-wooded localities, such as forest-clearings, small
woods, plantations, shrubberies, heavily timbered parks, where patches of yews or
hawthorn and bramble are left to break the monotony of the landscape, and old
orchards; in such places it builds, varying the site of the nest according to the
haunt which it frequents; thus in a wood or clearing it usually makes its home
in some old hawthorn, tangled with blackberry-vines, or in a holly, or on the
branch of a fir, oak, or beech-tree, some fifteen to thirty feet from the ground;
but in an orchard, an old lichen-covered apple or pear-tree is chosen.
The nest of this bird most nearly resembles that of a Bullfinch, being very
shallow, and always formed in a foundation of twigs; one which I found in
course of formation, had the whole of this external structure formed of strongly
spined interlaced twigs of hawthorn, from which all the leaves had been stripped,
and presented a most formidable appearance; sometimes, however, the twigs are
intermixed with coarse roots and dead plants, and ornamented with lichens; the
is more gregarious than in summer, though even during the latter season Seebohm
tells us that "small parties of males may be seen seeking food in company.
They are very early breeders; and fresh eggs are usually found in February and
March. Eggs have been taken in April and May; but these are probably laid
by birds whose first nests have been destroyed by their numerous enemies, or by
heavy falls of snow, and are not second broods, as some ornithologists have
supposed. If these birds are successful in rearing a brood, the family-party,
appear at once to commence their gipsy life. If they meet a similar family-party,
they appear to fraternise at once, and form the nucleus of a flock, which is some-
times seen far from home as early as June, wandering in search of food. It is a
very pretty sight to see these flocks feeding upon the berries of the mountain-ash,*
or stripping the larch or spruce trees of their cones. In winter they are exceed-
ingly tame, and will allow the observer to approach very near and watch them
without showing any signs of alarm. They are very active, and when busily
engaged in feeding, place themselves in all sorts of positions, like a Tit or a
Willow-Wren. They pass from tree to tree with strong but undulating flight,
continually calling to each other. In late winter or early spring the males have
a low warbling song, which reminds one somewhat of that of the Starling. The
female is said also to sing nearly as well as the male." (Hist. British Birds,
Vol. II, pp. 32-33).
I have never heard the Crossbill sing, but should imagine that it would not
differ greatly from that of the so-called "Pine-Grosbeak" (when recording probably;
for hitherto I have only heard the latter utter a little bubbling chirrup, consisting
of six or eight notes); in any case it must be a poor song, if we are to trust
the judgment of our musical friends the Germans.
The call-note, and the only note which I ever heard proceed from the beak
of the Crossbill, is chip, chip; chip, chip; chip, chip; repeated incessantly, from
morning to night, with the monotonous regularity of a pendulum: but Seebohm
declares that the bird sometimes says tsup, or tsop; in which I think he must
have allowed his imagination to lead him astray, as it certainly has when he
likens the cry to those of Chaffinches and Linnets.
The horizontal branch of a fir near the trunk, or at a distance from the
trunk, or the forking branches of a pine, sometimes not more than five feet from
the ground, are occasionally selected as building sites; but it is stated that
apparently the favourite position is almost at the top of the tree, in the centre of
the forking branches which thus form a sort of frame in which to support it.
Many readers of his life have, doubtless, held similar views with regard to Jack
Sheppard.
As a matter of fact there appears to be no redeeming point in the character
of the Hoodie, he is a scourge when wild and when kept as a pet; not only
useless, but dangerous so long as he is alive: when dead, however, Herr Gätke
tells us that the Heligolanders esteem him as an article of food. Lord Lilford
says that "the habits of the bird are always abominable, and although, from the
accident of its not nesting in our county, we are not exposed to the detriment
from this thief to which those dwelling on the other side of the Tweed are
subject, we have no plea to urge in defence of the Grey Crow, and hold him as
a sturdy vagrant to be summarily dealt with at all times and in all places. We
should be sorry to exterminate any bird; but this one could be better spared than
any other with which we are acquainted."
Family-CORVIDÆ.
THE ROOK.
Corvus frugilegus, LINN.
IN Western Europe the Rook breeds as far to the north as the Arctic circle,
but not so far in the East. It is also found in the summer throughout
Central and Southern Europe, being resident in the more southern portion
of its range, but migratory in the more northern countries, whence at the approach
of winter it retires to Southern Europe, North-east Africa, the Mediterranean
islands, and Asia Minor. Eastwards it breeds in Western Siberia and Turkestan,
wintering in North Persia, Afghanistan, Cashmere, and N. W. India.
In England, Wales, and Ireland the Rook is pretty generally distributed in
all suitable localities; in Scotland though rarer and more local, it is rapidly
sufficient to supply the bird-market, whereas the Merlin, Sparrow-Hawk, Hen-
Harrier, and most of the Owls, which are more or less destructive to small birds,
pay no attention to close-seasons, but destroy throughout the year. On several
occasions bird-catchers have brought me Sparrow-Hawks which have swooped at
the decoy-Goldfinch and been caught in the nets.
The nest of the Goldfinch is most frequently to be found in orchards, prefer-
ably on the lichen-covered branch of an old apple-tree, though it also occurs at
times in the branches of a pear, horse-chestnut, beech, plane, poplar, yew, cypress,
laurel, or even in a deciduous shrub: in Norfolk I took it from near the top of
a tall hawthorn hedge. Usually the nest, which is small and cup-shaped, is neatly
formed of moss and lichen, interwoven with rootlets and wool; it is lined with
thistle-down, small soft feathers, and horse-hair: my Norfolk nest, however, is
without the lichens, and is chiefly lined with some woolly substance, probably
vegetable, but hardly white enough for thistle-down: the eggs in this nest are
also unusually small.
The late Rev. H. A. Macpherson wrote:-"The most curious nest of the Gold-
finch that I ever saw was built entirely of stems of dry grass. It contained a
full complement of tiny Goldfinches, and was built in a plum-tree."
The eggs number from four to five, usually the latter, and are similar to
those of a Linnet, but usually rather smaller; they are greenish-white, spotted
and streaked, especially at the larger end, with purplish-brown, and with lilacine-
grey shell-spots; they, however, vary greatly from this type, some eggs being
merely speckled and spotted with dull blood-red, whilst others are almost without
markings.
The song of the Goldfinch is much over-rated; it is cheerful, but scrappy in
character; the hen sometimes sings quite as well as the cock, and the song is
the same: some years ago I carefully noted the whole performance, going over it
again and again, with the bird singing close to me, until I had it all down exactly
as follows:-Whee-é-ur, whee-é-ur, whee-é-ur, too-oo-ee, ti-weea, ti-weea, whitweea, chiwhit,
chiwit, chiwit; wheec, wheec, wheec. The last three notes are accompanied by violent
lateral jerks of the tail and a corresponding movement of the body, which some-
times almost upsets the bird's balance. The call-note bears some resemblance to
that of the Canary; but the scolding note, or note of defiance, is a sharp shrill
chit, sometimes continued into a chitteri-tit, tit: as the Goldfinch is tolerably
quarrelsome, this note, which somewhat reminds one of a common autumnal
utterance of the Robin, is frequently heard.
The food consists largely of seeds, buds, and the leaves and flower-heads of
weeds, especially groundsel; but when rearing their young the old birds also feed
same time, I gave her two of the Twites' eggs, making up the number for each
with infertile eggs; both birds hatched on the same day; the two in the Redpoll's
nest perished at once, though she is a good feeder, and has reared two broods of
her own this season; the Twite successfully reared hers, and they left the nest
on July 19th, and are now very fine birds, but quite normally coloured; this I
expected, as I have reared a large number during the past few years from both
white, pied, and cinnamon Lesser Redpolls, and have inbred them, but have never
had one vary in the least from the normal colour.* Young Twites are not nearly
so precocious as Redpolls; they were a long time before they attempted to peck
for themselves, and even now (August) clamour to the old ones for food, whereas
I have seen young Redpolls a week after leaving the nest shell hard Canary-seed.
My birds have no soft food given them, but as much of the flowering top of the
dwarf-grass, dandelion, and hard-head tops, thistle, plantain, etc., as they wish, and
as many aphides off rose, apple, or plum-trees as I can at the time obtain; infested
branches being put in the aviary for the birds to peck them off. The latter, I
consider, are very essential for the successful rearing of Finches in confinement,
especially for the first few days after they are hatched."†
wooded or cultivated districts, and in solitary bushes on the more barren portions
of our islands.
The fully adult male Chaffinch in breeding plumage has the forehead velvety
black, the crown and nape steel blue, the former sometimes tinged with green, the
latter somewhat ashy; the mantle bright chestnut; lower back bluish ash-grey at
base of feathers, sap-green at tips, changing to bright sap-green on the rump and
upper tail-coverts; lesser and median wing-coverts white; greater coverts black
tipped with white; quills smoky-brown, with narrow dull yellow edges to the
outer webs; two central tail-feathers smoky-brown, remaining feathers blue-black;
the two outer feathers with broad wedge-shaped white patches, that on the outer-
most one occupying fully half the feather; sides of head, throat, breast, and front
of belly vinous-chestnut, lower belly and flanks somewhat duller and greyer; under
tail-coverts white; beak leaden-blackish, paler beneath; feet dull brown; iris
hazel. After the autumn moult the feathers of the crown have brownish edges,
the under parts are slightly paler and the beak is flesh-brown, with dark tip. The
female has the crown and back buffish-brown, and the under parts buffish-grey; it
also appears to be slightly smaller than the male. The young in first plumage
are similar to the female, but rather paler: in the first year they do not attain
their full beauty, the crown being brownish with two dusky longitudinal stripes;
indeed the full sheeny lustre is not acquired until about the third year; the
median wing-coverts also are more exposed in old birds, making the white belt
across the wing broader.*
Pied examples of the Chaffinch are not very rare, and the white in the
plumage certainly increases with age. I caught one in my garden many years
ago, and exhibited it for two years running at the Crystal Palace Bird Show. A
second bird presented to me about 1904, developed a white spot on the nape which
increased in size with each successive moult.
Like the British Buntings, the Chaffinch both runs and hops; on the ground
it almost invariably either runs or walks; also during the summer months it is
almost exclusively insectivorous; like the Buntings again, it accustoms its young
to taking food from its beak at a much earlier age than do the other typical
Finches: its position, therefore, should certainly be at the end of the Subfamily of
which it is the type, and immediately before the Emberizinæ. It has even been
asserted that the Chaffinch pairs on the wing, but this fable is based upon its
violent and impetuous courtship, in which respect it corresponds with the members
of the New World genus Sycalis, both sexes sometimes falling to the earth strug-
still fonder of spiders, and this fact should, I think, be taken into account when
summing up the virtues and vices of birds. If man would let nature alone, he
would find the balance perfect, but he interferes everywhere and makes a mess of it.
In autumn and winter the Yellow Bunting feeds largely upon grain and seeds
of weeds, wandering over the country in flocks in company with Chaffinches,
Bramblings, etc.
Although a beautiful bird, the wild caught Yellow Hammer never commands
a high price, bird-catchers generally being well satisfied to receive a shilling for
a pair: the fact that the bird is not a fine singer partly accounts for this, but the
wildness of newly caught specimens is another serious drawback to the popularity
of this species; inasmuch as, after weeks of confinement, it still rattles about its
cage whenever it is approached, uttering a whining sort of chirp. An aviary suits
it far better.
In October, 1888, I purchased a pair from a bird-catcher, and turned them
into a large covered aviary: in the succeeding spring they built a typical nest
in an Arbor-vitæ; but, as already related previously, a hen Hedge-Sparrow took
possession of this nest as soon as it was completed, and subsequently the unhappy
Buntings were a long time in deciding upon a new building-site; towards the
end of July they selected a very damp corner on the ground behind a marsh-flag
and began to build; they, however, never finished this nest, but continued to
carry about hay and straw in an undecided desultory manner until November,
when they finally gave it up as a bad job. Early in 1890, both birds died:
possibly they did not receive sufficient insect-food to keep them in good health.
Cases have been recorded in which this species has been discovered sitting
upon eggs deposited in a slight depression on the bare ground; there is no doubt
that the explanation of such behaviour is-that its nest has been taken. I once
removed a nest with three eggs from a hedge, and passing a day or two later saw
the bird sitting on a little platform of ivy twigs upon which the nest had been
partly supported; as I approached she flew away, disclosing her fourth egg.
the centres of the feathers darker than elsewhere; the bastard primary is large;
the tail-feathers are dark brown, with greyish margins, excepting the outermost
feather which is pale brown with buff outer web; and the second feather which
has a sandy-buff margin to the outer web; the superciliary stripe is broad,
extending far backwards from above the eye, and is buffish-white; the under parts
are principally buffish-white, deeper on the flanks and thighs; sides of throat
spotted with blackish-brown; breast spotted and streaked with dark brown; flanks
slightly streaked; bill brown, under mandible paler; feet fleshy horn-brown; iris
hazel. The female has a shorter crest, and is rather smaller than the male, and
has a much shorter wing. The young are more rufescent and have blackish sub-
terminal bars and pale buff tips to the feathers of the upper parts. After the
autumn moult the plumage of the Crested Lark becomes more sandy in tint, and
the dark centres to the feathers less conspicuous.
Col. Irby, in his "Ornithology of the Straits of Gibraltar" gives the
following account of this species:-"The Crested Lark is one of the most
abundant birds both in Morocco and Andalucia, though never seen in any great
numbers together. They are distributed in pairs on every road-track and open
plain, often at intervals of only some twenty yards. Excessively tame and fear-
less, they have acquired the name of Carretera, from their habit of frequenting
roads, to which they resort as much on account of the horse and mule-dung, at
which they are to be seen pecking, as for the purpose of dusting themselves;
and they are often to be noticed on the sea-shore, running about like a Sanderling
within a yard of the water.
They have no song worthy of the name, and are altogether rather vulgar and
uninteresting birds. This species is one of those which I could not detect
migrating in the slightest degree.
The Crested Lark usually commences to lay about the 20th of April, placing
the nest in some tuft of grass or under shelter of a small stone or clod of earth
-constructing it, like those of other Larks, with bits of grass, bents, etc., lined
with hair."
Howard Saunders says:-"The nest, often commenced early in March, is
usually placed in some such depression of the dry ground as a hoof-print, or
amongst herbage, but sometimes on an old wall or bank of earth, or even on the
ridge of a low thatched shed in the fields; the materials employed being dry
grass and roots. The eggs four to five in number, vary from greyish-white
distinctly spotted with brown and violet-grey, to greenish-grey mottled with olive-
brown; average measurements ˙95 by ˙68 in. Incubation, in which the male
takes part, lasts a fortnight. The Crested Lark is a tame and conspicuous bird,
part of it while with its beak it tugs at another, after the manner of a hawk.
My Jay would eat the orange berries of the Solanum, if hungry, but did not care
in the least for yew and privet berries. Jay No. 2 devoured peas by making a
hole in the side of the pod, and after it had got them all out it would amuse
itself by pulling the pod to pieces, no doubt to look for more. Sparrow's eggs
dropped into the cage were adroitly caught before they reached the bottom, and
a mouse or a shrew was very acceptable. Being put into the same cage as a
Carrier Pigeon and a Turtle Dove, in spite of a disabled wing, and though the
cage was nine feet long, the Jay soon despatched the latter by pecking its back."
As cage-birds Jays are great favourites, not only on account of their wonderful
powers of mimicry, but because, as Lord Lilford says, "In captivity the Jay is a
most amusing pet and becomes very tame. There is little trouble in keeping it
in good health and condition, as in the matter of food scarcely anything comes
amiss. We have found, however, that more than one of these birds in our
possession preferred the eggs of small birds to any other food."
I became possessed of a young English Jay in the summer of 1898, and
reared it satisfactorily; it proved to be the largest and most beautiful cock bird
that I ever saw, either alive or dead. Although gifted in imitating cats, dogs,
distant poultry, the sound of trumpet and jews'-harp, the splashing of water and
mixing of bird-seed, I could only succeed in teaching it to say two words-"Hullo
Jimmy!" which, however, have become its favourite utterances: it is extremely
playful and expects me to stop and have a game with it every morning at feeding-
time. For staple food I give a mixture of two parts crumb of stale household
bread, one part powdered biscuit, one part egg, one part "Century Food." It
also has fruit (not orange, it won't eat that, although my Blue-bearded Jay is
fond of it), nuts, peas; insects of various kinds, especially cockroaches, worms,
spiders and occasionally a dead mouse or bird; rarely a little minced raw beef.
The male Yellow Bunting in breeding plumage appears to vary considerably
in beauty of plumage, the birds of Mid-Kent appearing almost like a distinct
species from those of North-west Kent, owing to the much greater development
of yellow on the head. The crown and nape bright Canary-yellow, with an olive-
brown streak across the forehead and bounding the sides of the crown; * or lemon-
yellow much more streaked with olive-brown; remainder of upper parts chestnut,
the feathers of the mantle and back with strongly marked black longitudinal
streaks; wing-coverts and inner secondaries dark smoky-brown, bordered with
chestnut; remaining secondaries and primaries sooty-blackish, with more or less
yellow margins to the outer webs and slightly ashy tips: two central tail feathers
dark smoky-brown, with pale cinnamon-brownish borders; remaining feathers sooty-
blackish, with very narrow yellowish edging to the outer web; the two outer
feathers with large snow-white wedge-shaped patches on the inner web; under
parts lemon-yellow, an olive-brown streak partly bounding the ear-coverts; breast
and flanks slightly washed with olive and streaked with olive-brown; beak dark
horn-brown on the culmen, becoming more leaden at the sides, lower mandible
much paler, especially along the edge and just in front of the chin; feet pale
flesh-brown; iris hazel. The female is much less yellow than the male (excepting
in pairs netted in West Kent which, even in breeding plumage, differ compara-
tively little) the yellow on the crown represented by irregular mottling; the
chestnut of the upper parts much less pronounced, excepting on the rump and
upper tail-coverts; whilst the olive-brown streaking of the under parts is more
defined. After the autumn moult the feathers of the head have dark tips and the
other feathers of the upper parts somewhat ashy margins; all of which are said
to be shed in the spring. The young nearly resemble females in winter plumage.
I have repeatedly tried to get hold of Yellow Hammers in brilliant plumage;
but, living on the borders of North-west Kent, I find that the catchers invariably
bring me dull-plumaged birds; the more intelligent of them have assured me that
they have never seen a brightly-coloured male Yellow Hammer in the neighbour-
hood, which exactly agrees with my own experience. In the males of North Kent,
on the other hand, all the males are especially fine in colouring, the dark markings
on their heads being so much reduced as to be indiscernible at a short distance.
The Yellow Hammer is abundant in all open country, but more especially in
the better cultivated districts where one sees the males dotted here and there like
sentinels on the topmost sprays of the hedges, or sailing with rapid undulating
flight down the lanes and country roads; in wild moorland and commons this bird
numbers of American Passeres imported yearly to this country, it would be indeed
surprising if some of them did not fall victims to the desire implanted in the
hearts of many collectors to secure every strange bird which they see; moreover,
quiet and confiding as the Crossbills and Rose-finches are in confinement, they
are in some respects far less attractive pets than many other birds; therefore it
is quite conceivable that the owner might weary of them, and give them their
liberty.
This near relative of our common species, agrees very closely with it in its
habits, frequenting and breeding in forests of conifers, and feeding largely upon
the seeds of these trees: in confinement it is said to be very fond of apples;
but I suspect, as is the case with the common Crossbill, it merely chews up and
drops the fruit in order to secure the pips, which these birds eat with great relish.
The nest is described by Mr. Dresser, as chiefly differing from that of L.
curvirostra in being smaller and slighter; the eggs also are said to resemble very
closely those of the common species, but are smaller and darker.
The song is stated to be superior; but, as the common Crossbill can hardly
be said to have a song worth mentioning, it need not be especially meritorious
on that account; indeed, Herr Mathias Rausch speaks of the Crossbills collectively
(Gefiederte Welt, Vol. XX, p. 396) as of trifling value as cage-birds, on account
of their song; with which opinion Major Alexander von Homeyer (p. 489) agrees.
Herr Gätke says that in 1889 this species "occurred more frequently (on
Heligoland) than on any previous occasion. On the 14th of August I obtained
a beautiful scarlet-red male, and an old female. On the 1st, 16th, 18th, 20th, and
22nd of September, from two, five, up to eight males and females were seen daily,
accompanied by larger numbers of the common species; but among all these
only one bird in the grey-and black-striped early dress. For my collection I
stuffed three fine red old males, a younger yellow male, two old females, and the
young bird already mentioned. A large number were consigned to cages by
fanciers: some of them having been sold, the rest subsequently died out."
Lord Lilford ("Birds of Northamptonshire," Vol. I, pp. 212-213) observes:-
"We have had many opportunities of closely observing the habits of this
eminently sagacious bird in various parts of the world, and, in spite of his
tendencies to murder, assault, and robbery, we must confess to a great liking for
him. The Raven is in this county a very early breeder, generally selecting a
secure ledge in a cliff, more rarely a tall tree, and returning to the same locality
for nesting year after year. The young birds often leave the nest during the
first fortnight of March, sometimes before that date. We have more than once
heard of a full complement of eggs early in February, and, on the other hand,
found unfledged young in more than one Raven's nest as late as the middle of
May. The old birds are always wary, one always keeping a close look-out whilst
the other is on the nest, and immediately uttering a warning note on the
approach of danger. We have heard of Ravens vigorously attacking persons
attempting to harm their nests, but have never witnessed anything of the sort,
our experience being to the effect that, during the siege, the parent birds usually
soar high in air over the nest, uttering, besides their usual croak of alarm or
anger, a curious sound, like the noise made by drawing a tightly fitting cork
from a bottle, occasionally turning complete somersaults in the air, and making
ferocious stoops in the direction of the invader, but always keeping well out of
gunshot-range. For some time after the young Ravens leave the nest they roam
in company with their parents, but soon separate and start off singly or in
couples on marauding expeditions on their own account."
Although not strictly speaking a gregarious species, this bird when attracted
by food often assembles in considerable numbers; when approaching a carcass it
does not fly directly to it, but alights at a short distance and approaches it
warily with heavy ungainly hops. Upon the wing it flaps heavily, but its flight,
nevertheless, is powerful and tolerably rapid.
The nest of the Raven is always bulky, though more so when built on
ledges of rocks than when placed in trees; it consists of sticks, twigs, heather-
stems, and sometimes a tangle of sheep's wool. The lining is of roots, grass,
wool, fur, or other soft materials. The eggs number from four to six, frequently
five; in ground-colour they usually vary from greenish-blue to olive-greenish,
more or less densely marked with deep olive-brown, the shell markings appearing
frequently like smears or faint patches of the same colour (as if partly washed
out); the pattern and character of the markings vary much as usual, sometimes
the streaks and blotches are few and large, sometimes they are mingled with
numerous smaller markings, sometimes again the small spots are so close together
as to give a different tone to the egg; the depth of the markings also varies
objects less conspicuous to the uninterested onlooker, and, therefore, may be in a
measure protective, is probable; but that it exists with any definite intention, is
no more than a guess.
Lord Lilford's view as to the site usually selected for the nest of the Reed
Bunting coincides with my own limited experience, for he says:-"All the nests
which we have met with were situated on the ground, or the crust formed by
the roots of the common reed." Hewitson, however, in the third edition of his
"Eggs of British Birds," observes:-I have, though rarely, found them at an
elevation of two feet or more above the water, and supported by a branch of the
common reed, not fixed like the nest of the Reed-Warbler, attached to the perpen-
dicular stems, but supported upon a bunch of them which had been prostrated
by the wind." Sometimes the nest is placed in young spruce firs, and it is
often found in herbage on a bank.
The materials of the nest seem to vary considerably; all mine are formed
of fine dead grasses and a few bents, or coarser bents with a blade or two of
broad-grass; and are lined with very fine grass and horsehairs, or fine grass
alone. Stevenson's nests seem to have been formed of fine bents and lined with
the feathery tops of reeds. Lord Lilford's were composed of moss and sedge,
with a lining of reed tops, and sometimes a little hair. Seebohm mentions
withered leaves of rushes as one of the materials employed, and Howard Saunders
speaks of withered flags. The eggs number from four to six, and are of various
stone tints varying between pale brownish-lavender and olivaceous-buff; blotched,
spotted, speckled, and often more or less boldly streaked with purplish-black, the
underlying spots appearing a lavender-grey: they have the opaque appearance
characteristic of eggs of the Chaffinch, but more nearly resemble one variety of
those of the Tree Pipit.
The nesting-season usually commences late in April or early in May, though
Lord Lilford mentions having taken a full nest as early as March 23rd, and as
from two to three broods are reared, nidification must continue until at least the
end of July, if not to the middle of August. It has been stated that the male
takes part in incubating the eggs, but I have not had sufficient experience of
this species to be able to dogmatise on the point. As a rule it is engaged in
singing its poor song, while the hen sits near by; and when the nest is dis-
covered both birds try to divert the attention of the intruder by tumbling about,
as if wounded upon the earth. The song consists of a few monotonous notes
cheo, cheo, cheo, chee, chee, chee, chee, and terminates with a harsh zshwee; the call-
note is said to be tschee, and Mr. Witchell states that he has heard another note,
resembling the battle-cry of the Chaffinch.
Wales it was somewhat rare at that season, now it is everywhere abundant in
North Wales. In Scotland, where it used to be by no means abundant, excepting
in some of the islands, it is now very common in nearly every county.
The adult male in breeding-plumage is glossy black, brightly shot with metallic
green, rosy-violet, and Prussian blue, the rosy and purplish tints being usually
most prevalent on the head, nape, mantle, and breast; the bluer feathers varying
in certain lights to Prussian green: the feathers of the upper surface, excepting
the head and fore-neck, tipped with dead gold, or sandy buff; flights and tail-
feathers dark smoky-brown, bordered with black, and edged with sandy-buff; thighs
and under tail-coverts blackish, the latter with broad buff margins: bill lemon-
yellow; feet reddish-brown; iris hazel. The female is less metallic than the male
and has larger buff tips to the feathers, the under surface of the body being more
or less spotted throughout the year; the bill is also blackish towards the tip.
After the autumn moult all the feathers of the upper parts are broadly tipped
with sandy-buff; the wing-feathers are greyer; and the sides of the face and under
surface are more or less conspicuously spotted with white: * the bill also becomes
partly, or altogether, dark brown. The young are greyish-brown, the quill and
tail-feathers margined with pale brown, and the feathers of the under parts with
whitish margins.
There is considerable difference in the metallic colouring of individual Starlings:
the example which I have noted below, as being heavily white-spotted in winter,
used to develop the most brilliant violet on neck and breast in the breeding-season;
the blue and green tints were also very bright; whilst the buff markings above
had a well-defined golden gloss: indeed, the whole bird appeared as if formed out
of burnished metal.
Wherever the House-Sparrow is, one may be pretty certain to meet with the
Starling either in town or country: it is a bird which is always conspicuous,
whether on the wing or on the ground: in spring one sees a dozen or more
flying round a Rook, regularly mobbing him as he carries home some grub to his
callow young, until in his fright he drops the dainty morsel and down go the
Starlings with much noise to quarrel over it; later the tables are turned, the
Starling as it carries food to its young being similarly tormented by Sparrows.
Now one sees the male bird sitting high up on some naked branch, on a chimney-
pot, or the corner of a gable, discoursing what he evidently considers sweet music.
Marvellous is the song of a Starling! a curious combination of whistling,
squeaking, gargling, and the sucking hiss made by pulling out the handle of a
April in the north of India, different flocks often unite into vast troops, containing
many thousand birds, and quite darkening the air, so close do they keep together,
even when flying. Great numbers are netted in some parts of the country, or
taken by bird-lime, or shot; for when feeding, they keep close to each other.
On one occasion, on the cavalry parade ground, at Kamptee, I bagged twelve
dozen birds after discharging both barrels, and many wounded birds escaped.
They get quite fat about this time, and are really very excellent eating, and they
are always called Ortolan by Europeans in India. They leave the north of India
about the end of April, or beginning of May, and they breed in the steppes of
Central Asia, Eastern Russia, and also in Northern Africa, placing their nest on
the ground at the edge of a scrub or bush, and laying four to six eggs, usually
marked with grey and rufous spots, but sometimes, it is said, unspotted yellow-
brown."
It is probable that, as with all the Larks, insects form a large proportion of
this bird's food in summer and seed in winter.
Herr Gätke says ("The Birds of Heligoland," pp. 359-360):-"Formerly,
hardly a year passed without this pretty little Lark being observed here at the
end of May or June, even though only in very solitary instances.
In former years, when more favourable conditions of weather prevailed, the
bird was seen pretty frequently in autumn, sometimes even as late as November.
During the time I have been collecting, it has passed through my hands about
thirty times; and besides that, it has been seen and heard, without being killed,
on an equal number of occasions.
I kept one of these pretty little birds over a year in a cage; it had been
momentarily stunned by a very light shot which had grazed the back of its head,
but recovered very soon, and became extraordinarily tame. It underwent a
complete moult in the autumn, managed to get safely through the winter, and
sang heartily during the spring; but died, much to my regret, at the beginning
of the summer. Its song was much more like that of a Bunting than a Sky-
Lark. I fed it on Canary-seed, which, like a Lapland Bunting in a cage hanging
by its side, it used to peel* before consuming; a Shore-Lark on the other hand,
which I had had for over ten years in a cage, never did this."
though partly concealed by broad whitish borders. After the autumn moult all
the feathers have pale tawny borders, but the distinguishing characteristics of the
male are not wholly lost. The young nearly resemble the female, but are more
tawny and more uniformly streaked above.
There is always a chance of anyone familiar with the appearance of this
species being fortunate enough to observe and recognize it upon our coasts during
the autumn or spring migrations: since the completion of Howard Saunders'
Manual, numerous examples have been either killed or noticed. Even as late in
the year as the 11th May, Mr. John Cordeaux ("Zoologist" 1893, p. 225)
observed au adult male in full summer dress on the short herbage on the edge
of the Bempton Cliffs, in Yorkshire. Mr. Cordeaux, who was accompanied by
Mr. M. Bailey, of Flamborough, says:-"We both observed it for some little time
through our glasses about half a dozen yards away, till it flew down the cliff-face
amongst a crowd of Guillemots and other rock birds, and did not after this show
itself again. What particularly struck me when watching this bird was the
intense black of the dark parts as contrasted with the yellow bill, broad white
streak over and backward from the eye, and chestnut collar."
Judging from Seebohm's account of this species it is, as might be expected,
a late breeder, he says:-"In the valley of the Petchora we did not meet with it
at Ust Zylma, in lat. 66°, until the 18th of May; and in the valley of the Yenesay,
on the Koorayika, in lat. 66½°, a solitary Lapland Bunting appeared for the first
time on the 4th of June-in each case at least six weeks after the arrival of the
Snow-Bunting. In both cases I had an excellent opportunity of watching their
habits. The first birds to arrive were males, principally in company with Shore-
Larks; they passed through on migration for about a fortnight, the latter flocks
being almost entirely composed of females. They seem to be entirely ground-
feeders, and ran about very actively wherever there was any bare ground; but
before the snow had entirely disappeared the Lapland Buntings had also taken
their departure, and we did not meet with them again until we had passed the
limit of forest growth. On migration they repeatedly perched in trees, and when
disturbed generally sought refuge in a tree. Like the Shore-Lark and the Snow-
Bunting, the Lapland Bunting occasionally hops; its flight is quick and powerful,
but more undulating than that of the Snow-Bunting. In its song the Lapland
Bunting reminds one both of the Snow-Bunting and the Tree Pipit. The notes
are not very loud, but are musical, and are continued for some time; and every
now and then a curious note is introduced which sounds like cheng, the consonants,
both at the beginning and the end, being pronounced gutturally, as in German.
This note is also frequently repeated alone, and is probably the note of endearment
usually without the white tips to the inner webs of the primaries, and with smaller
wax-like terminations to the secondaries; the tips of the tail-feathers somewhat
narrower. The young are browner, and have no black on the throat.
This species appears in the breeding-season to haunt the more open portions
of forests of conifers and birch, but chiefly woods of pine, or larch, nesting in
colonies. The nest is a large open cup-shaped structure built upon the branch
of a tree, upon a foundation of twigs and reindeer moss, composed principally
of black hair-lichen, interwoven with slender twigs, bark, moss, and feathers, the
latter appearing most prominently in the lining. The eggs usually number from
five to six, rarely seven, and are described by Professor Newton, who owns the
greater part of the large series acquired by John Wolley (the discoverer of the
breeding-grounds of this species) as "delicate sea-green, sometimes fading to French
white, but often of a more or less pale-olive, and occasionally of a dull purplish-
grey. On this are almost always bold blotches, spots, and specks of deep brownish-
black, though sometimes the edges are blurred. Beneath these stronger markings
there is nearly always a series of blotches or streaks of greyish-lilac, and among
them well-defined spots or specks of yellowish-brown are interspersed. In some
eggs the darkest markings are quite wanting, in others the ground is of a deep
olive colour."
According to Seebohm, who, in 1867, kept a pair of this species in a cage,
"They were remarkably silent birds; the only note I heard was a cir-ir-ir-ir-re,
very similar to a well-known note of the Blue-Tit. Occasionally this succession
of notes was repeated so rapidly as to form a trill like the song of the Redpole."
In the summer time the Waxwing appears to be largely, if not wholly insecti-
vorous, crane-flies seeming to constitute its favourite food; but later in the year
it devours great quantities of berries of juniper, privet, guelder-rose, as well as
hips and haws: it is especially fond of mistletoe berries. In the winter, when
Waxwings are very fat, they are said to be greatly esteemed by the Russians as
an article of food.
Lord Lilford, in his "Birds of Northamptonshire," speaks of "the chatter of
a party of Waxwings passing overhead whilst we were inspecting my aviary in
the pleasure-grounds at Lilford," and he adds-"I am well acquainted with the
note of the Waxwing from having kept many of them in confinement, a proceeding
which I cannot recommend, as they have no merit whatever except their beauty,
being dull, quarrelsome, greedy, and filthy to an incredible degree, and in most
instances dying from plethora after a short captivity. Hips and haws, currants,
raisins, (in fact, small fruit of all kinds) are voraciously devoured by these birds,
and appear to be their favourite food, but they will also eat chopped meat, hard-
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE BRAMBLING.
Fringilla nontifringilla, LINN.
OF the distribution of this species Howard Saunders says:-"To the Faroes
the Brambling is only an exceptional visitor. On the mainland it breeds
throughout the sub-Arctic pine and birch forests, from Norway to the
valley of the Amur: while on migration it occurs in Japan, China, Northern
India, Asia Minor, and the whole of Europe; but it is only in very severe winters
that it pushes its wanderings to the African side of the Mediterranean. Immense
flocks sometimes visit Belgium, Holland, Germany, and Heligoland; but state-
ments that this species has nested in the Pyrenees, the Alps, or the Ardennes,
are as yet unconfirmed." (Manual of British Birds, p. 177).
To Great Britain the Brambling is chiefly a winter migrant, although there
is reason for believing that a few pairs have occasionally remained to breed with
us. Although pretty generally distributed throughout our islands in winter, it
appears to be rather more numerous in Scotland than in England, whilst in
Cornwall, the west of England, and the south of Ireland, it is rarer than else-
where; and in very severe winters it is more abundant, but particularly near
beech-woods.
The adult male in breeding plumage has the upper parts blue-black, some of
the feathers with tawny margins, the middle of the lower back and rump white;
scapulars and lesser wing-coverts bright tawny; median coverts white; greater
coverts black, tipped with white, so as to form a prominent bar; quills smoky
black; the primaries with narrow yellowish white margins, the inner ones with
white bases; secondaries with white margins towards their extremities; upper
tail-coverts black, with ashy tips; tail black, the outer feathers with a little white
at the base of the inner web, and about half the outer web broadly white; sides
of head black; throat and breast reddish-tawny; belly white, the flanks spotted
with black, and the thighs black behind; under tail-coverts white, tawny on the
vent; beak blue-black; feet reddish-brown; iris hazel. After the autumn moult
the feathers of the head and back have broad tawny margins, as also have the
tips of the greater wing-coverts and the innermost secondaries; the quills and
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE TWITE.
Acanthis flavirostris, LINN.
ON the Continent the Twite, according to Dr. Sharpe, is generally distributed
throughout Europe, west of Russia, and south of the Baltic, breeding in
Scandinavia. Howard Saunders observes that it "is found in summer
among the islands and along the coast of Norway up to about 70° N. lat., but
in Sweden it is scarce even in the sub-alpine districts, and it is somewhat doubtful
if it nests in Northern Russia. On migration it visits Denmark and Northern
Germany-sometimes passing in large numbers over Heligoland-Holland, Belgium,
and France; but it seldom goes far south, and its occurrences in Spain, Italy,
and Southern Russia, are few and far between."
In England during the breeding-season the Twite occurs locally in suitable
localities from the midlands northwards; in Wales, according to J. H. Salter, it
is almost unknown as a breeding species. A nest was taken at Westward Ho!
in 1904, and a supposed nest of this species in Surrey in 1894; in Scotland
and Ireland it is pretty generally distributed, being especially abundant in the
west of Scotland, the Hebrides, Orkneys, and Shetlands.
The adult male in breeding plumage has the feathers of the crown, nape, and
back ruddy olive-brown, with blackish centres and paler edges; the rump rose-
red; wings dark brown; the median and greater coverts with paler edges, whitish
towards the tips; the quills with pale edges; the inner primaries margined, and
the secondaries tipped with white; tail-feathers blackish-brown, the three outer
pairs with whitish edges. A superciliary streak, the lores, ear-coverts, and cheeks
rufous-brown, the ear-coverts with dusky streaks; under parts mostly pale tawny-
brown, clearest on the throat; centre of breast and abdomen sordid white, as are
the under tail-coverts; sides of breast and flanks streaked with blackish; beak
pale ochre-yellow; feet dark brown; iris hazel. The female has no rose-red on
the rump; and in width of crown and beak differs as does the Linnet. After the
autumn moult this species shows less of the dark centres to the feathers, and
the beak becomes paler. Young birds nearly resemble the female, but have some-
what more dusky beaks; the males, however, show a tinge of rose-reddish on the
rump.
important; as showing how little the agency of man can affect the extinction of
species, so far as it is directed merely against birds, their nests and eggs:-
"Finally, I would add one further remark, as regards the position of these Crows
in the economy of nature. Everywhere the protection of birds creates the greatest
interest, and man is always put in the foreground as the greatest enemy of the
feathered creation. Now, although the destruction of song-birds and other small
species, as it appears to be carried on in Italy, ought to be resisted by all possible
means; nevertheless all that is offered for sale, in the way of eggs and small
birds, in Italy during one complete migration period, would scarcely equal the
quantity of eggs and nestlings destroyed by the Hooded Crows during one single
summer day.
"It is perhaps true that the number of individuals of Hooded Crows becomes
nowhere apparent in such prepondering quantity as in Heligoland, in consequence
of which their destructive influence is under-estimated; but if one had the oppor-
tunity of seeing the hosts of them which travel past during two months of
autumn, in uninterrupted sequence, and return in the spring, as is the case here,
where no tree, wood, or hill, impedes the view; and if one at the same time
remembers that all these fellows, impudent as they are cunning, do nothing else
during the long summer days, from early dawn to sunset, but plunder the nests
of other birds, from the Lark to the Eagle (Dresser), one would indeed wonder
that there are still any birds, other than Hooded Crows, left in the world. By
all means let us nurture and protect our little bird-friends in every possible
manner, more especially by abstaining from destroying any small shrubbery or
bush, the sole use of which may, perhaps, be that it affords some small songster
a hidden nook for its nest; above everything, however, let us aim at compassing
the destruction of Hooded Crows unsparingly, year in year out, by all the means
placed at our command."
The nidification of this species is similar to that of the Carrion-Crow; in
Ireland it commences about the middle of March, but in Scotland later; the nest
does not differ from that of C. corone, and is similarly situated, although it has
been found built on the roofs of huts, according to Gray. The eggs are precisely
like those of the Carrion-Crow in all their varieties.
The cries of this species and of C. corone are indistinguishable, and the food
is the same; but the Hooded Crow is bolder and even more destructive.
Dixon is the only Ornithologist who seems to have a good word to say for
this Crow; he says:-"I must confess that, in spite of the dark tales of plunder
and his questionable mode of getting a livelihood, the Hooded Crow is a favourite
bird of mine, and his habits and regular movements never fail to interest me."
increasing, occasionally wandering to the Outer Hebrides and now breeding as
far north as the Orkneys and Shetlands.
The male Rook is black, glossed with purple, most brightly on the upper
parts. From the base of the bill is a bare grey warty patch, extending over the
chin and upper part of the throat. Bill and feet black; iris brown. The female
is slightly smaller and less glossy than the male. The young bird is still less
glossy and has the base of the bill covered, as in the Carrion-Crow, with
bristly feathers; it may be distinguished by its more slender bill and the deep flesh-
colour of the inside of the mouth, this, however, changes to slate-colour with age.
In England the Rook is a useful bird so long as it can obtain a sufficient
quantity of insects and their larvæ to support it and its offspring; but when,
owing to protracted drought it cannot obtain these, it becomes somewhat
mischievous after the fashion of its congeners. In Scotland, where pastures are
somewhat limited, it is dreaded and detested almost as much as the Carrion-Crow.
It is certain that when pressed by hunger it will sacrifice weak birds to satisfy
its craving for food; for, as noted in my "Handbook" I have on several
occasions witnessed this predatory habit in severe wintry weather.
The Rook is essentially a gregarious bird and haunts well-cultivated districts,
preferably where tall trees are numerous and pastures are large; here he may be
seen day after day busily feeding on snails or digging for worms, leather-jackets
and other noxious grubs; in the fallows, whilst he doubtless swallows a little
grain, he does incalculable good by destroying wire-worms and larvæ of cock-
chafers, whilst in the turnip-fields he not only devours such examples of the
latter grubs as he can find, but does considerable execution upon the dreaded
and destructive caterpillar of a common moth (Agrotis segetum).
The nests are generally placed in the upper branches of tall trees; either in
copses, plantations, pleasure-grounds, parks, or when planted in rows bounding
the margin of a pasture, or forming an avenue over a country road; but
Stevenson rightly says:-"Though for the most part selecting the tallest trees,
and placing their nest near the upper branches, they will build also on low
Scotch firs, in the most exposed situations," and he adds:-"A still more novel
site has also been chosen by a few pairs at Spixworth Park, where, for the last
two or three seasons, they have built in the tops of some fine laurustinus bushes,
about twelve or fourteen feet from the ground, and others in a dwarf ilex, close
to a flight of stone steps, connecting one part of the garden with the other, yet
so low down that the feeding of the young was plainly visible from the windows
of the hall." When a rookery is well established, the birds are not easily
persuaded to abandon it, excepting for private reasons of their own; moreover the
Scotland it occurs most generally on the western lowlands during the summer, but
becomes much commoner in the Eastern districts during the winter; westwards
its range extends to St. Kilda, and northwards to the Outer Hebrides. In Ireland
it is local, but common in suitable districts. In October flocks of Corn-Buntings
migrate to our shores, considerably adding to the numbers of our home-bred birds.
The adult male Corn-Bunting has the feathers of the upper surface pale
brown, with blackish central streaks, the wing-coverts and innermost secondaries
dark brown, bordered with warm buff and with whitish tips; quills dark smoky-
brown, the first primary with yellowish margin to the outer web; tail blackish-
brown, with pale edges to the feathers; lores and a superciliary line buffish-white;
under parts buffish-white, the throat sparsely spotted with black, and separated
from the cheeks by a moustachial line of dark-brown spots; breast numerously
marked with triangular black dashes, which are somewhat rufescent at the sides;
centre of breast and abdomen whitish, sides streaked with dark-brown; beak with
the upper mandible dark horn-brown, edged with yellow; lower mandible ochre-
yellow; feet pale flesh-brownish; iris hazel. The female is slightly smaller than
the male, and greyer in colouring. The young are more richly coloured, the
wing-coverts and secondaries more prominently bordered with fulvous, the spotting
blacker and the under parts tinged with buff. After the autumn moult the adult
birds are generally more rufescent than in summer.
Owing to its sombre colouring and its habit of roosting on the ground, this
species has sometimes been mistaken for a Lark, and in autumn and winter it is
frequently netted in company with Skylarks: possibly for this reason it often
receives the name of Bunting-Lark.
The Corn-Bunting chiefly haunts open and cultivated districts, more especially
where cereals are freely grown. It is not a nervous bird, and I have frequently
stood within a few yards criticizing its ungainly figure and miserable apology for
a song as it sat perched upon a scraggy bush, stump, or fence, apparently quite
satisfied with its performance: the latter has been variously described; but, to
those not acquainted with the songs of some of the Marsh Troupials of the New
World, or the Abyssinian and Rufous-necked Weavers (which have the same
character, though more prolonged and varied) the most accurate idea of the discord
is conveyed, by saying that it resembles the sound made by crushing broken glass
in a mortar. Seebohm describes the song as "tees, tees, tees, tis-is-is-s-s-r-r-re,"
Howard Saunders as "tic-tic-teese," Lord Lilford as "tedious and rasping notes."
Seebohm observes that "the ordinary call-note of this bird is very loud, and
resembles the word tzit; the note between the sexes is a long drawn-out kaak, and
frequently the two notes are heard together tsit-kaak."
snaps at her tail again; the mystification and rage of the cat are exceedingly
ludicrous, as also is the adroit way in which the Jackdaw invariably evades her.
The keenness of vision of the Jackdaw is perhaps never so much appreciated
as when one experiments with a tame example. For many years my old friend
Dr. John Grayling, of Sittingbourne, had a tame Jackdaw in his garden. This
bird was particularly fond of hazel-nuts, and would catch every one that was
thrown at him; but if you took two or three nuts with about the same number
of pebbles in your hand, and flung them at the bird, one after the other as rapidly
as possible, he caught every nut, and evaded every stone, without fail: his
manner of avoiding a missile made you look small, for he never moved farther
than was necessary, sometimes merely lowering his head, or taking a step to right
or left.* When one considers how marvellously powerful a bird's vision must be
to enable it, in a second, to distinguish between a nut and a similarly-coloured
pebble, leading it instantaneously to decide whether to catch or avoid it; it seems
preposterous to imagine that it can ever hesitate as to the nature of a leaf-like
insect, however well it may seem to be disguised to our less discriminating sight:
indeed I am fully convinced that if a dozen leaf-like insects (recently killed to
prevent their showing movement) and an equal number of similar crumpled leaves
were flung on the floor of an aviary containing insectivorous birds of any kind,
it would not be long before all the insects had been selected and devoured.
As the Jackdaw is almost omnivorous, there is never any difficulty in feeding
it in captivity: but the bird is less entertaining in a flight-cage than when (with
one wing clipped) it is allowed the run of the place.
the first appearance of danger, it flies off to another and more distant tree, and,
taking up a similarly elevated position, scans the country round till the danger
which had excited its alarm has passed away. It builds here in May and June,
constructing a compact and well-formed nest in the fork of a carob or almond-tree.
Its affection for, and the courage it displays in the protection of, its young are
remarkable. Wary as it is at other times, on these occasions it seems to lose all
fear; uttering piercing cries, it will fly close round the head of the intruder, and
actually make a feint of dashing in his face."
Howard Saunders says:-"The note usually heard is a harsh krah, kack, krah;
but the male has also a low and rather pretty song in spring, and shows great
capacity for imitating the notes of other birds." Seebohm observes:-"Its song
is by no means unmusical, and very gentle to proceed from such raptorial jaws.*
It reminded me very much of the twittering of a Swallow, or the warble of a
Starling. Some of its call-notes, however, are loud and harsh enough; and I at
first thought it was imitating the notes of other birds, in order to attract them
within reach; but inasmuch as the greater number of notes it apparently imitated
were of birds far too powerful for it to grapple with, such cannot be the case."
Dixon says that he "met with this species (in Algeria) in all parts of the
country wherever the vegetation was sufficient to afford it shelter."
Herr Mathias Rausch says of the Woodchat Shrike, that in many regions it
is somewhat rare, and it costs a good deal of trouble to obtain a good bird. "It sings
louder than the Red-backed, or the Lesser Grey Shrike, has moreover a certain
roughness in its voice, which somewhat detracts from its imitations, and thus
prejudices their distinctness." Possibly it was this which led Seebohm to think
that the cries of this species were imitations of rapacious birds. The mimicry
practised by the Woodchat must, however, be fairly good, inasmuch as it was
noticed even in Bechstein's time; as pointed out by the late Charles Witchell
(Evolution of Bird song, p. 174).
Herr Rausch considers that, as a cage bird, the Woodchat belongs to the
second order of merit (Gefiederte Welt, 1891, p. 499). Although rarer than the
Red-backed Shrike, there is not the least doubt that its song is neither so pure
nor so perfect in its imitative power; and, when one has to keep a species in a
separate cage, on account of its domineering, spiteful, or even dangerous character,
it is most satisfactory to get something in exchange for the extra trouble required
to preserve it in health: therefore, if I already possessed Lanius collurio, I certainly
should not covet its rarer relative.
by examples of Liothrix and Zosterops: it also ate a good many oats, in addition
to Canary and other seeds.
In spite of their usually placid behaviour, this and all the Buntings are very
pretty additions to a mixed aviary; their plumage being as a rule quite uninjured
and scrupulously clean. Although perhaps not so passionately fond of bathing as
some of the more typical Finches, they perform their ablutions once or twice each
day in a methodical and business-like manner, which is probably quite as effective
as the hurried splashing, characteristic of a Goldfinch or Canary.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE MEADOW BUNTING.
Emberiza cia, LINN.
TWO examples were captured near Shoreham in October 1902, and a third
near Faversham in 1905.
In Great Britain the first recorded specimen was killed at Norwood, in Surrey,
and was described in 1743; since then it has been met with in almost every
county; the latest occurrences being of one observed on an apple-tree at Greatham,
near Liss, in Hampshire, on May 4th, 1896, and secured by its observer (Vide
Zoologist, 1896, p. 382), three in Ireland and one in Scilly in 1899, one in
Kent and another in Yorkshire in 1901, one in Shetland in 1903, and five
or six in 1906.
The male in breeding-plumage has the head, neck, and breast glossy purplish
black; the wings including the coverts, the tail and coverts of both surfaces glossy
greenish-black, and the remainder of both surfaces pale salmon-rose; the bill is
also rose-coloured, but more orange towards the base, which is blackish; the feet
brown; iris bright brown. The female is altogether duller, and has a somewhat
smaller crest. After the autumn moult the black feathers are tipped with greyish-
brown, and the rosy feathers with dusky brown, the crest being also undeveloped;
but a gradual change takes place in the spring. The young are very similar to
adults in winter plumage, but show no trace of black or rose-colour on the feathers,
their wing- and tail-feathers have buff edges; the bill is browner, and the feet
are more flesh-tinted.
Like the common Starling this bird is eminently gregarious in its habits.
Jerdon observes that "it usually makes its appearance in the Deccan and Carnatic
about November, associating in vast flocks, and committing great devastations on
the grain fields, more especially on those of the Cholum or Jowaree (Andropogon
sorghus)"; he then quotes the following from Mr. Elliot's manuscript notes:-
"Is very voracious and injurious to the crops of white Jowaree, in the fields of
which the farmer is obliged to station numerous watchers, who, with slings and a
long rope or thong, which they crack dexterously, making a loud report, endeavour
to drive the depredators away. The moment the sun appears above the horizon
they are on the wing, and at the same instant shouts, cries, and the cracking of
the long whips, resound from every side. The Tillyers, however, are so active
that if they are able to alight on the stalks for an instant, they can pick out
several grains. About 9 or 10 o'clock a.m., the exertions of the watchmen cease,
and the Tillyers do not renew their plundering till evening. After sunset they
are seen in flocks of many thousands retiring to the trees and jungles for the
night. They prefer the half ripe Jowaree whilst the farinaceous matter is still
soft and milky."
It must not, however, be supposed that the Rose-coloured Pastor is altogether
injurious to agriculture: on the contrary it does good service by its wholesale
destruction of locusts and other noxious insects. Seebohm gives the following
bird, is quarrelsome, spiteful, and can on no account be trusted in an aviary with
any species weaker than itself. It is, moreover, fully as much trouble to its
owner in respect of food as many a far more attractive species: yet, according to the
late Rev. H. A. Macpherson, it has one merit; although its own song is insig-
nificant, the Hawfinch is not wholly destitute of the imitative faculty. In my
friend the late Charles A. Witchell's interesting work on the "Evolution of Bird-
song," we read (p. 172): "Even so poor a songster as the Hawfinch will imitate
when a captive. The Rev. H. A. Macpherson imforms me that they will pick up
any sounds."
Nevertheless, when a bird has no beauty of form, and when its colouring is
little superior to that of a hen Chaffinch, its song should compensate for other
deficiencies; and, as Major Alexander von Homeyer remarks (Gefiederte Welt,
Vol. XX, p. 489) the cherry-kernel biter is "not gifted with natural song."
It appears to me that, in dealing with British birds, it is far more convenient
to introduce the Bullfinches (the so-called Grosbeaks) immediately after the true
Grosbeaks: in their habits they are not dissimilar; whereas, to place them, as
Howard Saunders has done in his "Manual," between the more slender-billed
Finches and the Buntings, seems rather unnatural: I have, therefore, not followed
him in this respect.
There is not the least doubt that, so far as their habits are concerned, the
most typical Finches (that is the members of the genus Fringilla) approach far
more closely to the Buntings than any other species of the Subfamily, and next
to Fringilla, I should consider Passer (in spite of its aberrant nest) to show
relationship to the Emberizinæ: I speak as an Aviculturist of course, and do not
venture to criticize the classification from a structural standpoint.
brown, with underlying spots of bluish-ash; sometimes the surface spots are wholly
wanting, the grey markings alone being in evidence; the spots are usually almost
entirely confined to the broader half, rarely to the apical half; and, still more
rarely, irregularly scattered over the whole surface; in most eggs they are largest,
and form an irregular zone, just above the middle.
In Kent I found the pink variety of the egg extremely rare, indeed I only
once succeeded in taking a full clutch of this form by fighting my way edgeways
through a dense (six-foot thick) hawthorn hedge, the hen bird chacking away, and
making little frantic rushes at my fingers, as I gradually struggled nearer to the
prize. In some counties I am told that the pink form is the prevalent one; it
certainly is the prettiest.
I found the nests of the Red-backed Shrike most commonly in the neigh-
bourhood of Maidstone; taking three in one morning from the forked branches of
stunted trees near the river: in such positions it was invariably more solidly built
than when placed in a bush or hedge; in character it is not unlike some nests
of the Greenfinch, but deeper; the outer walls formed of coarse grass-stalks and
moss, and the lining of fine bents, wool, and horsehair.
As is well-known the name of Butcher-bird has been given to this species
owing to the habit which it has, in common with other Shrikes, of impaling its
prey upon thorns, in order, it is said, more readily to tear them to pieces:* per-
sonally I have never found any of its victims in this unpleasant condition, but
hundreds of observers have done so. Its food consists of insects, young and old
birds (even up to its own size) lizards, and mice: it seizes its prey suddenly,
dropping upon it when unsuspecting an attack; for, although a migratory bird,
the Red-backed Shrike is not very powerful on the wing.
The note of alarm and anger, as already hinted, is a harsh chack or char, the
call-note a harsh chirp, but the song, though short, is very pleasing. Herr Mathias
Rausch says (Gefiederte Welt, 1891, p. 446) "The best singer and mocker among
the rapacious birds is acknowledged to be the Red-backed Shrike or Thorn-piercer
(Lanius collurio). He is also the commonest and most widely distributed of all,
inasmuch as he may be found in a wild state throughout nearly the whole of
Europe. Especially good and varied singers are, however, only to be met with in
regions rich in birds. I have already owned Red-backed Shrikes, which copied
which give it an extremely soft and variegated appearance; a few twigs outside,
and a little hair in the lining." In form the nest is usually a fairly regular cup;
but the nest taken from sprouting oak-twigs, noted above, is shaped like a sabot.
The eggs number from four to six, usually five, and vary in ground-tint from
greenish to pinkish-white, rarely to pale green, or buffish; the markings are, more
often than not, chiefly confined to the larger end, and consist of spots, comma-
shaped markings, irregular lines occasionally, and blotches of pitchy brown, or
blackish, with underlying spots, and sometimes large blotches of sienna-reddish, or
reddish-chocolate. In some eggs the markings are principally confined to a zone
near the larger end, and sometimes they are scattered here and there like fly-marks
over the entire surface: the form is by no means constant, a shortish oval type
being common, though all gradations may be found between this and a long
almond or even spindle-shaped type.
The Greenfinch will pair freely, both in cage and aviary, with the Canary; and
crosses between it and the common Linnet in a wild state, are probably the most
frequent and the best authenticated of the numberless well-known wild hybrids
which have been recorded. In confinement the Greenfinch breeds as readily as a
Canary, and brings up its young much better, not attempting to pluck them (like
that foolish bird) after they have left the nest. It is very pugnacious in the
breeding-season, dashing straight at its opponent like a bull at a gate.
One year I had a cock Greenfinch in an aviary with a pair of Canaries, and
of course, the Grosbeak fancied it could easily dispose of its slim opponent, and
take possession of his wife: so, with a harsh defiant zshweer, it charged blindly at
him: the Canary took little apparent notice of the Greenfinch until it was within
a foot or two, then with a graceful little curving flight he alighted on its back,
and plucked out a beakful of feathers. This manæuvre was successfully repeated
every time that the more powerful bird attacked him; so that at length the
blundering bully came to consider that discretion was the better part of valour.
I found that a pair of Greenfinches in an aviary built in an ordinary nest-box
hung upon the wires, building and feeding exactly as a Canary would: but not
attempting to incubate until the third egg was deposited: they not only hatched
all their eggs, but brought up their family without one failure.
In the winter, especially in severe weather, this bird may readily be caught
in the ordinary cage-trap, especially if a decoy bird is placed in the cage, and a
few sunflower seeds upon the platform. The larger Grosbeaks are all fond of
these seeds, and it is no uncommon sight in spacious gardens to see the ripe
sunflower heads covered with Greenfinches busily at work extracting every seed.
I once knew two old ladies who were great breeders of Canaries: on one
other times it lives chiefly upon various kinds of seeds of weeds, and of grain. In
confinement it may be kept for years in health without insect food, but nevertheless
a few caterpillars, mealworms, cockroaches, or spiders certainly are good for it.
I think it was about the year 1887 that I took and hand-reared a nest of four
young Chaffinches, which eventually proved to be two pairs: the nestlings are not
easy to feed, as they always back away from the food, wagging their heads violently
from side to side, so that it requires patience and dexterity to pop it into their
wide-gaping mouths. My two male birds came into magnificent colour, and sang
extremely well, probably learning their song from a Chaffinch which still lived in
one of my aviaries up to 1897, though it must now be quite fifteen years of age.
This old fellow was a fine Essex bird when I bought him, and a very good singer;
and, although he had been unable to fly for two or three years, and his white
eye-lashes showed his advanced age, he still sang strongly in the spring: but his
chief interest to me lay in the fact that he once took a Canary to wife.
In the spring of 1886 the veteran above-mentioned was flying about with
other Finches in a small aviary, and one of my hen Norwich Canaries took a
violent fancy to him, following him about everywhere: at first he did not seem
to reciprocate this feeling, but eventually he began to feed her from the crop.
When I noticed this, I placed the two apart in a large flight-cage where they soon
paired. The Canary then built and commenced to lay, but I only found the shell
of the first egg (which was so exactly marked like that of a Chaffinch that it
would have deceived anyone).
Although I found the Finch feeding his wife as she sat in her nest, I felt
certain that he must have destroyed her first egg; therefore, I promptly removed
him to another cage. After this the Canary laid three other eggs, all more or
less marked like the first, and sat steadily upon them for three weeks; when,
knowing that there was no chance of their hatching, I took them away and found
that they were all clear.*
The idea prevalent in the minds of many naturalists, that the Chaffinch differs
from other Fringillidæ in not feeding its hen and young from the crop, is probably
based upon the fact that it begins to give its nestlings solid food before they leave
the nest. This is certainly the case with some, if not all, members of the Sub-
family Emberizinæ.
Madeira. In Africa it occurs from Morocco to the Albert Nyanza. It has been
introduced into Australia, New Zealand, and the United States, where it has
increased to such an extent as to be an unbearable nuisance. (Vide Sharpe and
Saunders).
Throughout Great Britain and Ireland, wherever man has made his home,
the Sparrow has quickly followed his example, even isolated houses usually
providing a pretext for the presence of this bird, sometimes to the extent of scores
of individuals.
The adult male Sparrow in breeding plumage has the crown, nape, and lower
back slate-grey, slightly washed with olivaceous, but the sides of the nape bright
chocolate-reddish in continuation of a broad streak from the ear-coverts; upper
back blackish, each feather broadly bordered with dull chestnut; lesser wing-coverts
bright chocolate-reddish; median coverts black, broadly tipped with white so as
to form a prominent bar across the wing; greater coverts blackish, broadly bordered
with dull chestnut; primaries blackish-grey, all excepting the first with pale
chestnut edging to the wider part of the outer web, but the inner primaries with
this edge continuous; secondaries blackish, with chestnut borders, paler and greyer
on the inner webs; tail blackish-brown, the feathers edged with whity-brown; a
narrow white line over the eye; lores black; cheeks, and sides of neck white;
throat and chest black, sometimes suffused with chocolate; remainder of under
parts white, ashy at the sides, and brownish on the flanks; beak leaden-black;
feet brown; iris brown. After the autumn moult the male has whitish-ash fringes
to the feathers of the head and throat, which appear to be very delicate in texture,
and break away in the spring;* the under parts are also more uniformly ashy,
the upper parts duller, the wing band yellowish, and the beak becomes yellowish-
brown.
The female is duller and browner than the male; the broad borders to the
feathers of the mantle and back being tawny rather than chestnut; the superciliary
line and wing bar less pure and conspicuous; the under parts browner, with no
black on throat and chest. Young birds chiefly differ from the female in their
paler colouring; the beak is dull yellow.
In towns the House-Sparrow is a useful bird, inasmuch as it feeds largely on
oats and other grain which it picks from horse-manure, and which otherwise would
render the latter less suitable for garden purposes; it also acts as a scavenger,
eating scraps of all kinds which have been thrown into the gutters, and which if
not removed in warm weather would soon become offensive. In very dry seasons,
a year passes without two or three being thus obtained, although it sometimes
happens that none are caught for a couple of years." One was seen at Beverley,
Yorks, in 1897. Two were caught at Dover, one near Yarmouth, in 1904, and
one was seen near Crowmarsh, Oxford; a female was caught at Rottingdean,
Sussex, in 1906; and some were reported near Lewes, in 1907. The claim of
this bird to be included in the British list is, therefore, considerably greater than
that of the Scarlet Rose-finch, a bird generally to be obtained in Calcutta, and
frequently included in consignments of cage-birds from India.*
The male Serin, of which the wild Canary is considered to be a sub-species,
has the forehead, a superciliary streak, the rump, and the under-parts, bright
yellow; the under tail-coverts are, however, almost white, and the flanks streaked
with brown; the remainder of the body, as well as the wing and tail-feathers, are
deep olive-brown, mostly with yellowish margins; but the greater wing-coverts
and secondaries are margined with sordid white; beak dark horn-brown, paler at
the base of the lower mandible; feet pale brown; iris dark brown. The female
is duller and more prominently streaked than the male, and in the winter both
sexes are distinctly duller than in the summer. The young show very little
yellow colouring in their plumage.
As bearing upon the question whether or not the Serin is likely, from time
to time, to visit England, the following note by Herr Gätke is of interest:-"Now,
although one can hardly expect to hear of this bird building a nest in Heligoland,
the occurrence here of five young grey individuals during the summer months at
all events seems to admit of the conclusion that these birds may have been bred
in the neighbourhood of the island, perhaps in Sleswick-Holstein. I do not, how-
ever, share the view that breeding attempts of this kind, made in districts far
distant from the regular home, justify one in assuming an extension of the breeding
area." It is conceivable, that birds bred far from their usual summer haunts, might
at the season of migration, join a stream of migrants, which would land them on
our shores.
According to Naumann, the Serin prefers the hilly, cultivated districts to the
plains, chiefly frequenting orchards, plantations, avenues of fruit- and walnut-
trees, vineyards, and even gardens in the middle of villages, or close to houses.
Dixon, who met with it in Algeria, observes (Jottings about Birds, p. 59)-"It
is widely distributed, not only in the mountain districts, but in the more northern
to strengthen its walls is another puzzle, for the additional stability which it gives
to a Swallow's nest is so considerable; that, taking a metal dipper filled with hay
to the top of a chimney, I have only had to lower the edge of the metal pan
below the nest and jerk it upwards, to secure the nest uninjured.
The food of the Martin consists wholly of insects, which it obtains on the
wing; in confinement, however, it readily feeds upon the usual soft food. In the
first week of July, 1891, my colleague, Mr. W. R. Ogilvie Grant obtained a nest
of four House-Martins about a week old, and gave them to me. Following out
the mistaken notions of many aviculturists I at first fed these young birds partly
upon raw rump-steak finely minced; but I also gave them a mixture of carefully
selected ants' cocoons, and preserved yolk of egg, ground up in a mortar with
maizena wafers, the whole carefully mixed together, and slightly damped. Upon
this diet all four attained their full size, after which they refused the raw meat,
but continued to eat the mixture greedily.
I kept these birds in a basket filled with hay, and several times each day they
were taken out and encouraged to fly about the room; but now they began to
object to return to the close confinement of their basket; therefore I purchased a
large cage, hung up a cocoa-nut nest lined with flannel in one corner, and taught
them to retire to it every evening, or whenever they appeared to feel the cold.
At the end of a month the Martins were able to feed themselves, and, like all the
Hirundinidæ when accustomed to soft food, they ate far more than was good for
them. I now tried a change of diet, giving "Abrahams' Food for Nightingales,"
damped ants' cocoons, cut up mealworms, and flies; but it was of no use, for three
of them soon died of plethora, and probably, in part, owing to insufficient exercise,
although we did our best to encourage them to exert themselves in various ways.
One of our plans was to put all four on the ground at one end of the room, then
run to the other end and call them: this was the signal for a most comical race,
in which at first they ran at a surprising rate though very awkwardly; but, as
they became excited in the race, used their wings, and finished with a series of
astounding leaps, finally flying on to our arms, and either running up our sleeves,
nestling down in the hollowed palms of our hands, or perching on our shoulders.
My son used often to hold one up in his hand, and it invariably sprang up and
pecked his nose, but only one of the four would do this.
Although naturally so greedy, our Martins would always leave their food
and fly to us when called; they could not, therefore, be accused, like most cage-
birds, of cupboard-love; they were also unlike other birds in their fondness for
being handled and stroked.
My fourth bird lived until the morning of September 18th, and became a
upon as the chief home of this species, where they (sic) may be met with at all
seasons uttering their somewhat harsh and unvaried notes from the tops of the
bushes, or whilst clinging to the reed stems; and in these localities the nests are
built on the ground, frequently at the foot of a small bush, placed in a hollow
amongst the soft moss that forms the foundation."
It was around these broads that I first met with the Reed-Bunting in any
numbers; I had seen individual examples from time to time not far from Canter-
bury, but I never obtained the nest until 1885, when I first met with it on
Hickling Marsh on the 13th May, and Mr. Salter sent me a second taken at
Dounton, in Salisbury, on the 21st May. Curiously enough, although I had never
come across it during many years in which I had birds'-nested in Kent, the month
after I had secured these two nests, my friend, Mr. William Drake, forwarded a
third to me which he had found on the saltings at Kemsley, near Sheppy. When
at the broads, in June, 1886, I dropped upon a nest (on the 2nd of the month)
at Mudfleet, containing five entirely unmarked eggs, but these were so much
incubated and so brittle that, with the greatest care, I was only able to save
two of them. (See fig. 198.)
All my nests were in slight depressions in mossy ground, sodden with wet
and not always safe to walk upon, even with bare feet and trousers rolled up
above the knees; indeed I and my companion Mr. O. Jansen had to walk very
circumspectly, part of the marsh here and there being detached and simply
floating in a pool of deep water, so that as you put a foot down it would dip
under, wetting you frequently to above the ankle. The nests are not con-
spicuous, are partly overhung by wiry grass-tussocks or sedge, and might easily
be overlooked, excepting for the presence of the birds which causes one to search
for them carefully: but to men whose eyes have been trained, as Entomologists,
from their boyhood, and who have been accustomed to recognize and pounce
upon tiny ground insects, a bird's nest is a very large and conspicuous object,
however cleverly concealed. This is a very strong argument against the theory
as to the cause of mimicry in nature; for it seems to me absurd to argue that
insectivorous birds, whose eyesight is so keen and quick that they can follow
every movement of the tiniest insect on the wing, should, when anxious for food,
be deceived by the vague resemblance of a conspicuous moth to a dead leaf;*
that the powerful vision of a predaceous bird should be utterly unable to detect a
sitting bird on account of her subdued colouring, or her nest because its walls
were decked with lichen. That mimicry does exist we know; that it renders
about the possession of a nut, for the cock often tried to rob his mate, and she
made every endeavour to retain her tit-bit, squeaking in a low key. It was on
the 19th of February that I first saw the male Nutcracker feeding his mate: she
fluttered her wings all the time, and cried as a young bird might have done.
Thereafter the relations of these birds became most intimate. I tried my best to
induce them to nest in the aviary, but they could not make up their minds to
breed in confinement.
Unfortunately, my health broke down completely in the spring of 1893: I
was obliged to leave my birds to the care of a friend. When I returned to duty
in the following September I found my birds newly dead, to my great regret.
The female had died from moulting troubles. It was thought that her faithful
mate had died of grief, as he pined away from the day of her decease.
The late Lord Lilford informed me in 1893, that he had kept a number of
Nutcrackers in confinement. He said that his birds were specially fond of hazel-
nuts and walnuts. They were supplied also with 'every other variety of nut and
berries that could be procured-hips, haws, peas, beans, acorns, blackberries,
beech-mast, cones of spruce, boiled rice, stale bread-crumbs, hard-boiled egg, now
and then a little boiled liver, beetles, earthworms and crushed hemp-seed. The
latter was mixed with dried ants' eggs.' I must say that my birds declined to
eat anything except nuts; but I was away on sick-leave during the months in
which their diet would naturally have varied most.
The late Mr. John Hancock kept a specimen of the Nutcracker in confinement
for six years. 'Its voice was very peculiar. It had an extremely harsh, loud
cry, resembling the noise produced by a ripping saw while in full action. This
cry was so loud that it could be heard all over the house. It had also a sweet,
low, delicate, warbling song. This was only uttered when everything was quiet.'
I never heard my male sing. He crowed, with a loud guttural caw, which
was uttered while the bird perched in a drawn, upright position, the mandibles
being visibly extended. He had a low squeaking note of pleasure, and could
address his mate in curious terms of endearment."
to a great extent upon aphides and small green caterpillars: in confinement soft-
food answers the same purpose.
As a cage and aviary bird the Goldfinch is a general favourite; some avicul-
turists admiring it (most unaccountably) for its energetic, though absurd song,
others for muling purposes, others again for its lovely plumage, and a few on
account of its capacity for learning the usual stupid tricks "violating the laws of
nature," as the editor of the 4th edition of Yarrell most aptly observes.
As a cage-bird the Goldfinch is too restless to be pleasing; he is on the
front wires half his time, and keeps jumping backwards and forwards from perch
to wires almost incessantly, vainly repeating a fragment of his song-"chiwit,
chiwit, chiwit." In an aviary everything is altered: he darts hither and thither
with undulating flight, poises on the top of, or hangs underneath a twig, or the
extremity of a spray of fir, picking out buds or leaves; he squabbles with his
brothers in the bath or the seed-pan, fights furiously for possession of a wife,
and, having secured her, wages incessant warfare with all who dare approach her.
For a nesting-site he chooses a Hartz-cage hanging high upon the back of the
aviary, assists his wife with her first nest, and builds a second in another cage
whilst the young are still under her care; such at any rate was my experience
in 1895: four young were hatched in my first nest, of which three flew and were
brought up, being fed as usual from the crop, upon partly digested seed and the
soft food prepared for my insectivorous birds.
After leaving the nest the mother-bird ceased to trouble about her young,
but began to lay in the second nest almost immediately; the male bird now
having to undertake the double duty of feeding his first family and his wife.
About thirteen days later five young were hatched, and but for the playfulness
of the first family would doubtless have been reared; but the young ruffians
pulled them all out on the sand and left them there. Shortly afterwards the hen
put a fresh lining into her first nest and sat again upon a clutch of six eggs, all
of which she hatched; unhappily all these, excepting the last one, which I put
under a Canary, shared the fate of their predecessors: even the sixth bird was
plucked to death by its foster-mother.
In 1896 my Goldfinches again built, quarrelling for bits of wadding, robbing
one anothers' nests, changing their minds as to the site of a nest, and pulling
the latter to pieces when completed; eventually one hen laid two or three eggs
in a Canary's nest, and the two mothers were so constantly disputing that, although
the young were hatched, none were reared. After the autumn moult one of the
birds produced a golden instead of a crimson colour on the face; but the Rev.
H. A. Macpherson told me that this was of common occurrence in captivity.
Mr. J. Lewis Bonhote, of Cambridge, who has kept all the British Corvidæ at
various times, with the exception of the Raven, writes as follows:-"The Magpie
is a nice sprightly bird, and when hand-reared is beautifully tame: he seems to
be the least pugnaceous of this rather vicious family. His merry rattling note is
a nice change from the ordinary croak so frequently uttered."
Like all the Crow-family, this bird if caged should not be closely confined;
the cage for a Magpie or Jay should be at least five feet in length, over three
feet in height and two feet in width; otherwise the bird does not get sufficient
exercise, misses his daily bath and often becomes ragged and unsightly.
Family-CORVIDÆ.
THE JACKDAW.
Corvus monedula, LINN.
BREEDS and is resident throughout the greater part of Europe, but does
not occur northwards beyond central Scandinavia; southwards in the
Mediterranean basin it becomes very local: it has straggled along the
African coast as far as the Canaries. In Asia it occurs northwards in Western
Siberia as far as lat. 60°; but in the valley of the Yenesei, Seebohm only observed
it as far north as lat. 56°; southwards it is common in South Russia, Turkestan,
westwards through the Caucasus to Asia Minor and Palestine, and southwards to
Cashmere and Afghanistan where it breeds, visiting the plains of N.W. India in
the winter.
In Great Britain it breeds and is resident in most suitable localities; though
on the rock-bound portions of our coasts it is frequently replaced by the Chough;
the two species being very rarely found occupying the same district. In the Outer
Hebrides it has not been met with, and to the Shetlands it is only a straggler.
Kent; and even after Mr. Bidwell had recognized in my collection a clutch of
eggs of this species, which I had taken at Iwade, near Sheppy, on June 5th, 1877,
as being unquestionably those of E. cirlus (a fact which, I believe, I promptly
recorded in the "Zoologist") the same statement was repeated, until the appear-
ance of Howard Saunders' Manual in 1888. It has, however, been found breeding
as far northward as Yorkshire, but it is of accidental occurrence at any season
either in the midlands or the northern counties.* In Scotland it has occurred as
a chance straggler, but its recorded occurrence in Ireland was formerly questioned.
The adult male Cirl Bunting has the crown and nape olive-green, longitudinally
streaked with dull black; the rump and upper tail-coverts olivaceous; the sides
of the head blackish-olive, with a lemon-yellow stripe above, and a second below
the eye, from the base of the beak to the neck; the chin and throat to the sides
of the neck dull black, bounded by a half collar of lemon-yellow; across the chest
is a greyish-olive belt; sides and flanks chestnut, narrowly streaked with black;
remainder of under parts lemon-yellow: in other respects this species nearly
resembles the Yellow Bunting, the back, wings, and tail being very similar; the
beak is dark horn-brown above, but paler and bluish below; the feet yellowish-
horn; the iris hazel. The female is much duller, and chiefly differs from that
sex of the Yellow Hammer in the absence of yellow on the crown, and the
olivaceous rump; the yellow of the under parts is also not so bright, and the
streaking is better defined. Young birds nearly resemble the female, but are still
duller. The male, after the autumn moult, has ashy fringes to the black feathers
of the throat, which, however, disappear in the spring.
In disposition the Cirl Bunting appears to nearly resemble the Yellow Ham-
mer; but during the breeding season it is evidently somewhat more skulking, for
although I have frequently heard it singing in the hedges and in rough scrub, in
the lanes and little frequented roads of Kent, I have very rarely seen the per-
formers: even in an aviary I found it at all seasons much more shy and retiring.
I should, therefore, be inclined to think that an example mentioned by Lord Lilford
(Birds of Northamptonshire, Vol. I, p. 176) must have escaped from confinement,
after some years of captivity in an aviary. He says:-"as I was watching my
Emus and other birds in the courtyard at Lilford, a fine male Cirl Bunting flew
down from a high elm tree, settled on the ground within a few yards of where I
stood, and began feeding on the grain which had been scattered for the Emus, and
The adult male has the middle of the forehead, front of crown, lores, ear-
coverts, sides of neck, and back black; an elongated white spot above each nostril;
crown and nape bright chestnut; lower back grey, shading into whitish on the
rump and upper tail-coverts; wings black, the coverts and secondaries tipped with
white, the primaries white at the base; tail black, tipped with white, the two
outermost feathers white at the base, and with white outer web; the under surface
white, the flanks washed with buff; bill black; feet dark brown; iris hazel. The
female is duller in colouring than the male, the black parts suffused with rufous.
The young are russet-brown, streaked and spotted above with dark brown and
whitish, the wing-feathers broadly bordered and tipped with rufous; the tail also
tipped with rufous, the outermost feathers pale; under surface heavily barred with
brown; bill yellowish horn-brown; feet darker horn-brown.
Like the Red-backed Shrike, this species haunts chiefly open or thinly timbered
country; but in Algeria, from what Dixon says, it appears to frequent the open
spaces in forests of evergreen oak; and Lord Lilford observes (Birds of North-
amptonshire, Vol. I, p. 78) "In Southern Spain, where the Woodchat is a very
common summer visitor, it is to be met with in all sorts of localities-the outskirts
of woods, olive-groves, gardens, and occasionally the great open treeless plains,
where the tall thistles alone offer it a perch or look-out station. In general habits
it much resembles the Red-backed Shrike, but so far as I know does not attack
small birds, which show no fear of it as they do of the former bird."
Seebohm, speaking of the food of the Woodchat, says that it "is composed
of beetles, grasshoppers, and many other insects, which, like the other Shrikes, it
will spit on thorns for the purpose of securing them until they are eaten. It
is often seen on the wing, like a Flycatcher; and when the capture of an insect
is made it returns to its old perching place, ever watchful for an object for a fresh
sally into the air."
The nest of this species is placed in the fork of a low tree; it is formed of
coarse bents and grasses, sometimes intermingled with cudweed (Gnaphalium) and
wool; the lining is either formed of fine grasses and moss, or of the flowers of
cudweed mixed with a few leaves and a little vegetable wool. The eggs number
from four to six, usually five, and somewhat resemble those of the Red-backed
Shrike, but are usually slightly larger; the reddish variety which, in the better
known species, is local but not uncommon, is very rarely met with in eggs of L.
pomeranus.
Speaking of the Woodchat in Malta, Mr. C. A. Wright (Ibis, 1894, p. 59)
says:-"Perched on the uppermost twig of some tree, its shining white breast forms
one of the most conspicuous objects in the ornithological landscape in April. On
Family-ALAUDIDÆ.
THE SHORT-TOED LARK.
Calandrella brachydactyla, LEISL.
HOWARD SAUNDERS admits that this species has been "justifiably
placed in the genus Calandrella, characterized by the absence of crest, a
stout conical bill, straight and short hind-toe, and infinitesimal bastard
primary." I, therefore, see no advantage in continuing to call it Alauda.
Inhabits Southern Europe in summer and is resident in Spain and Portugal,
as well as the Canaries and North-west Africa; in winter it occurs in North-east
Africa and southward as far as Abyssinia; eastward it breeds in Persia, Turkestan,
and North-west India.
To Great Britain the Short-toed Lark is a rare straggler, about nine
authenticated instances of its occurrence in England having been recorded, six
of them in autumn, one in April, and one in July: of these one was obtained on
the Scilly Islands, one in Hampshire, four in Sussex, one in Cambridge, and one
in Shropshire: in 1890 one caught near Portsmouth was exhibited at the Crystal
Palace. In 1904, a female was caught on the Outer Hebrides, and it has occurred
once in Ireland.
The general colouring of the male in breeding-plumage is pale rufous or
sandy-brown, with dark brown centres to the feathers; the central tail-feathers
are smoky-brown, the remainder blackish, but the two outer feathers have
pale buffish patches, similar to the white patches on the tail of the Sky-Lark; a
white superciliary streak; under parts white, suffused with pale buff on the breast
and flanks; a few dark streaks on the sides of the neck; bill dark brown, paler
below; feet yellowish horn-brown; iris hazel. The female resembles the male
in plumage, but is peculiar in having both wing and tail longer than in the male.
The young have all the feathers of the upper parts tipped and bordered with
buff. After the autumn moult the plumage is redder.
Colonel Irby ("Ornithology of the Straits of Gibraltar") says:-"On the
Andalucian side of the Straits the spring arrival commences about the middle of
March, and the passage continues for a month later, at which time nests with
eggs may be found near Gibraltar. Excessively abundant, as above stated, in
dark brown at the tip of the upper mandible; feet blackish-brown; iris hazel.
The female is slightly smaller than the male, with a broader crown; upper parts
slightly darker; rump and breast without rose-red colouration; the under parts
also somewhat more streaked than in the male. The young nearly resemble the
female, but have no red on the crown. After the autumn moult the rose-colouring
disappears, but towards the spring it gradually reappears in the feathers without
a moult: this reproduction of bright colouring does not, however, take place in
caged Redpolls, but, where they are confined in large well-ventilated sunny aviaries,
it does in the first season.
In its habits, haunts, food, and song, the Lesser Redpoll nearly resembles
the Mealy type: its nest, which is placed in the fork of a tree, a hawthorn, or
gooseberry bush, a hedge, or a large grass tussock, usually near water, is not
unlike a small, neatly formed, and very softly lined Linnet's nest; it is firmly
constructed of plant-stalks, roots, moss, and dry-grass, with hair towards the
interior; the lining consisting of pure white willow-down, wool or occasionally
very fine grasses and feathers. The eggs, which number from four to six, are
either pale blue, or bluish-white, with dark purplish-brown surface spots, and
sometimes short linear dashes and underlying blood-red spots and speckles; some
eggs are spotted nearly all over, and others principally at the larger end, an
imperfect zone of spots is often present at this extremity: there is considerable
variation in size.
I have not only seen and heard the Lesser Redpoll in Kent during the breeding
season, but have on several occasions flushed the hen bird from her nest; twice
I obtained the nest with six eggs from grass-tussocks growing upon narrow foot-
paths through marsh and pools of water, at Murston,* and once from a hawthorn
bush on marshy land, at Kemsley; the last-mentioned nest was less firm than
usual, though compact, the body of it being formed almost entirely of wool, with
an outer thin framework of dried grass and an inner lining of hair.†
Lord Lilford (Birds of Northamptonshire, Vol. I, p. 196) observes:-"About
Lilford these birds appear occasionally in flocks of from twenty to fifty or sixty,
almost always in very severe weather, and then haunt the alders by the river-sides,
their habits and manner of feeding at that season much resembling those of the
to the top of a high hawthorn hedge to discover the contents of a nest." S. A.
Davies, ("Zoologist" 1892, p. 29), remarks that:-"In Norway they nearly always
prefer bushes, if procurable. Whilst travelling in 1890, in the Saetersdal, I
observed that-as noticed by Mr. Saunders in his 'Manual of British Birds,'-very
often the nests were built under the eaves of the houses. In some cases the
peasants had placed large props under the eaves for the nest to rest upon: in
others the nest appeared to be built half inside the house, between gaps in the
timbers. The Magpie is regarded as a bird of good omen, and it is constantly
encouraged as much as possible to nest near the house. In one place I saw, in
a low fir-tree close to a house, no less than nine Magpies' nests. I never heard
before of Magpies nesting in colonies." Lord Lilford says that in Spain he
frequently met with "nests which could be examined without any climbing, and,
still more, whose contents were attainable from horseback:" he also, as recorded
by Howard Saunders, "found several nests in the papyrus reeds of the Anapo,
near Syracuse."
The nest itself is very bulky and when built openly is always roofed over
with a basket-like covering of thorny sticks, between which and the nest proper,
which is made of the same materials cemented together with mud, there is only
a narrow entrance: the cup of the nest is very deep and neatly lined with rootlets.
The eggs number from six to eight, rarely nine, and are pale emerald green
(or exceptionally fleshy-white); a clutch of five in my collection obtained in the
village of Bobbing in Kent, in May, 1888, are uniformly flecked all over with
short irregular olive markings interspersed with dots of the same colour; but
others have the spotting massed at the larger, or more rarely, at the smaller end,
and in some cases there are blotches and streaks of brown among the other markings,
and I have seen eggs coloured and marked like those of the Pied Wagtail.*
The male bird takes his share in the duties of incubation.
The food of this bird consists of snails, worms, insects and their larvæ, eggs,
young birds, mice, carrion; and later in the year, fruit, beech-mast, and acorns,
as well as grain when procurable. Early in August, 1879, Mr. Frohawk saw
considerable flocks feeding on the fallows in North Devon.
The natural note of the Magpie is a harsh chattering; but, like some of the
other Crows he is a good mimic and, as Swaysland observes, "is easily taught to
talk." Lord Lilford remarks:-"In confinement or, more properly speaking, in
semi-captivity, the Magpie is a very amusing bird, but his ceaseless chatter is, to
our ears, most unmusical and annoying, and his thieving- and hiding-instincts have
long been historically famous or infamous.
or by using a pea-whistle, and the call-note somewhat resembles that of a Canary,
a kind of tewey.
The favourite food consists of seed of the birch, but many other seeds are
eaten, and in confinement the same food is eaten by the Redpolls as by the Canary;
the most wholesome seeds being Canary, German rape, and oats. Curiously enough,
aviculturists do not appear to be aware of the fact that most seed-eating birds
are fond of the last-mentioned wholesome and cheap seed, and they quite laugh
at the mere idea of offering oats to small birds, imagining that, because the seed
is large, it is only suitable for Cardinals or other large birds: this is a curious
mistake. In addition to the above, grass-seed, thistle, and teasel, are good for a
change, especially during the breeding and moulting seasons.
Not being particularly fond of Redpolls in an aviary, I have never purchased
the Mealy race; but Henry Stevenson in his "Birds of Norfolk" (p. 229) says:-
"Both the Mealy and Lesser Redpolls, from their tameness and engaging actions,
are most desirable additions to the cage or aviary, but from their happy contented
natures are liable to grow too fat, and like Ortolans, when over-fed, drop off the
perch in a fit of apoplexy. Mr. Charles Barnard, of this city, before mentioned
as so successful in breeding the Bramblings in confinement, had a brood of young
Mealy Redpolls, hatched off in his aviary at Stoke, in July, 1860, a very uncommon
circumstance with this species."
Of late years the judges at some of our large shows have been very unwilling
to award prizes, in the British classes, to birds which do not breed with us;
asserting, in support of their action, that most of these birds have not even been
captured upon British soil; but have been imported as cage-birds direct from
Germany. Singularly enough, they invariably waive this objection in the case of
the Mealy Redpoll, which (though it may be in wild breeding-plumage, and by
no means tame) usually carries off the prizes over the heads of the more soberly
clad though home-bred Lesser Redpoll. Such inconsistency can only be explained
on the supposition that the life-history of the Mealy Redpoll has not been so inti-
mately studied as it ought to be by those who have to deal with it upon the
show-bench.
As Gätke observes:-"The breeding stations of the Mealy Redpoll lie within
the Arctic Circle, both in the Old and New World." Speaking of the migration
of this species, the same author says that on the 4th and 5th November, 1847,
"countless flocks" and "innumerable multitudes" visited Heligoland:-"the whole
island was literally covered with these birds, so that one might have thrown a
stone in any direction one chose, and it was sure to hit birds as long as it con-
tinued rolling along the ground." It is during such unusual manifestations of
general pet: his cage was kept in a small spare room, the wire door being usually
left open, so that he could go out and in at pleasure; every day, as soon as I
returned from town, I used to run up and call him, and he would at once fly to
me and nestle down in my hand. Towards the end of his life he appeared to feel
the cold, and usually retired early to his cocoa-nut nest, but he generally tumbled
out as soon as he heard my footstep. Two days before he died his cage door was
shut and he had got into his snuggery, but I called out, "Well little chap, how
are you?" In a moment his head was popped out and he sprang to the cage-
door: I opened it, stepped back to the end of the room and called him, and he
immediately flew across as usual.
I don't think I was ever more fond of any pet than I was of that House-
Martin, and I felt his death acutely: but, nevertheless, I do not recommend the
species as a cage-bird; its wings are so long, and its legs so short, that the
primaries constantly get dragged through the dirt and need frequently cleansing,
which tends to give the birds cold. A long and well-warmed corridor would make
a suitable aviary for them.*
Family-HIRUNDINIDÆ.
THE SAND-MARTIN.
Cotile riparia, LINN.
OF the distribution of this bird outside the British Islands, Howard Saunders
writes:-"In the Faroes and Iceland the Sand-Martin has not yet been
obtained, but on the Continent it is generally distributed from 70° N.
lat. to the Mediterranean in summer; while it also breeds sparingly in the
northern districts of Africa, and abundantly in Egypt and Palestine. Eastward,
Berwickshire one, and Yorkshire one, which last was shot at Scarborough, October
23rd, 1889, the same day of the month as the Irish example in 1887. Since
that date one was shot at Wells in 1900; a specimen is recorded for 1904, a
third for 1905, three for 1906, all from Norfolk; three were seen in Yorkshire
in 1907; in Cheshire one was seen in June 1903; in the Shetlands several were
seen and three shot in 1906. It would therefore appear that this little Flycatcher
is likely to occur, especially late in the autumn, upon our coasts; and, inasmuch
as one example on an average has lost its life, in addition to those seen, every
two years (taking the dates from 1863 to 1907), the importance of admitting the
species into the present work will be recognized.
This elegant little species has a curious resemblance to our Robin, and Seebohm
expresses the opinion that it is " a connecting-link between the Robins and the
Flycatchers"; his description of the bird is so satisfactory that, in the present
instance, I shall quote it in full:-'"The Red-breasted Flycatcher has the general
colour of the upper parts, except the crown, nape, and sides of the head and neck
which are bluish-grey, olive-brown ; central tail-feathers blackish-brown ; the outer
ones white at base, and broadly tipped with blackish-brown; throat and breast
orange-chestnut; rest of underparts white, suffused on the flanks and under tail-
coverts with buff; beak brown, paler at the base; irides hazel; legs, toes, and
claws dark brown. The female in general colouration resembles the male, except
that the rich orange-chestnut throat is replaced by buff, and the bluish-grey is
wanting on the head and sides of the neck.
Males of the year scarcely differ from the female, and breed in the following
spring in immature plumage (M. minuta). In the second year the chestnut appears
on the throat (M. leucura); in the third year the chestnut appears on the
upper breast (M. parva); and in the fourth year it extends also on to the lower
breast" (M. hyperythra). "Young in first plumage are spotted on the breast and
upper parts, as in all the allied species."
I believe that this is by no means the only species which has received a
different name for each plumage: I have already noted * that examples of Munia
atricapilla which I received in young plumage in 1887, did not acquire the distinc-
tive black ventral band until the second moult; but a more curious change occurred
in the spring of 1896, when one of my old examples of Quelea quelea assumed
the breeding-plumage of Q. russi, the black mask being wholly lost, and I have
since proved that the little Cardinal (Paroaria cervicalis) is only an incomplete
plumage of P. capitata.
This species appears to be more essentially a forest-haunting bird than our
in Siberia, Mongolia, and China, and a subspecies in Turkestan and Yarkand,
have been distinguished by names; but none of them occur in Great Britain.
The Reed-Bunting is resident with us, and generally distributed throughout
our islands, although only a chance visitor to the Shetlands. In the autumn there
is an extensive immigration from the Continent, which reaches our eastern coasts
and the coasts of Ireland in September.
The adult male has the head, including the chin, throat, and centre of breast
jet black; a white moustachial streak running from the base of the lower mandible
to join a white collar continuous with a belt which bounds the black of throat
and breast; feathers of back, wing-coverts, and secondaries black, bordered broadly
with bright chestnut; lower back and upper tail-coverts bluish-ash, the feathers
tipped with chestnut, those of the lower back partly black-centered; primaries
smoky-brown, with narrow chestnut edges to the outer webs; tail blackish, the
two outer feathers on each side with the greater part of the outer web and a large
wedge-shaped patch on the inner web white; remainder of under parts dull white,
tinged with bluish-ash and buff, and streaked with black on the flanks; beak
brownish-black, under side of lower mandible much paler; feet brown; iris hazel.
After the autumn moult, the feathers of the head, back of neck, chin, throat, and
front of breast, have tawny or brown tips, and the feathers of the lower breast
and belly are stained at the tips with buff. In the female the feathers of the
head are dark brown with reddish-brown borders; the lores and a superciliary
stripe bounding the ear-coverts pale buff; the throat is white, bounded on each
side by a broad blackish streak; the breast is streaked with brown; otherwise
she is similar to the male, though slightly smaller. The young bird is very like
the female.
During the summer the Reed-Bunting is essentially a marsh-loving bird,
frequenting all moist spots in the neighbourhood of rivers, broads, canals,
drains, or streams, wherever rushes, reeds, and the wiry grasses which delight in
damp soil abound; in such spots its nest is almost sure to be found by careful
searching.
At this season the Black-bonnet is always paired, but as autumn approaches
it wanders over the country in small flocks, often associating with Corn Buntings,
Larks, Pipits, or Wagtails, and wandering through stubbles and rick-yards in
search of scattered grain, or waste corners where weeds abound, the ripened seed
of which afford them food.
But the summer time affords the most satisfactory opportunites for watching
the habits of the Reed-Bunting, and Norfolk is one of the best counties in which
to study it. As Stevenson observes:-"the broads in this county must be looked
boring a hole into the centre of the trunk and pouring in shot; the gardener
who empties a charge of shot into the branches of his fruit-trees, can, therefore,
hardly expect them to be benefited thereby. If he were wise he would bait a
cage-trap, catch his Bullfinches and sell them at a shilling apiece for cage-birds:
they would, even then, die quite soon enough to satisfy any feelings of enmity
which he might nourish, for my experience of these birds in captivity is-that it
is quite exceptional for them to become really tame even in large aviaries;
consequently, unless hand-reared, they rarely live for more than eighteen months
in captivity.
When first turned loose in an aviary, a cock Bullfinch always creates a panic;
his brilliant colouring seems to greatly alarm other Finches, so that his flight
through the midst of them produces much the same result as the rush of a bull
through a crowded street. Yet this powerful looking bird is really most inoffensive;
if annoyed he only opens his mouth and makes grimaces, and if he does become
tame, he is not long in doing so: one which I had was tempted to take sunflower-
seeds from my fingers three weeks after its capture: a Canary, with which I
paired it, was far less afraid of it than our indigenous Finches were.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE SCARLET ROSE-FINCH.
Carpodacus erythrinus, PALL.
A FULL account of this species will be found in my book "Foreign Finches
in Captivity." I do not admit its claim to be called British, for although
five examples have been obtained in England, one at Brighton, in 1869,
and the other at Hampstead in the following year, it is quite possible that both
and egg; one of these birds lived for three years, and would even permit me to
raise my hand until my nose touched her beak, when she would fly off to a twig,
and return directly I held my hand out to her again; there were two hens and
a cock in this trio, and the male outlived both of his wives; finally he appeared
to have acquired a growth in his throat, which obstructed his breathing; there-
fore as my experience of doctoring birds is, that in nineteen out of twenty cases
it kills them within ten minutes, I thought I would give my Siskin the oppor-
tunity of doctoring himself; so I turned him loose in my garden, where he
remained for about an hour, and then flew straight away. I have had many
other Siskins at various times, sometimes three or four pairs together; they
have always become very tame in a surprisingly short period, and have been
altogether delightful pets; but most of them have died within a few months.
Siskins do not seem to have anything like the constitution of most Goldfinches.
One tame little hen bird, however, lived to a good age; and, when she had lost
three husbands in succession, I caged her and made a regular pet of her. After
six months I wearied of the extra labour (every separate cage adding to the time
occupied in providing for my large family); I, therefore, turned Cissie, as I called
her, into one of my bird-room aviaries; but she had forgotten all about liberty,
flew wildly against the wires in the greatest terror, and presently settled down in
a corner with her face to the wall; having evidently decided thas life was no
longer worth having: I, therefore, picked her up and restored her to her cage,
where she sat looking stupid for half-an-hour before she recovered. I subsequently
gave this bird to a young lady, who christened her Priscilla, and made much of
her to the day of her death about a year later.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE CITRIL FINCH.
Chrysomitris citrinella, LINN.
AN example was caught by a Yarmouth bird-catcher on January 29th, 1904.
take our small, dark Lesser Redpoll separately." As this appears to me to be
the most reasonable course to pursue, I shall do the same. Dr. Sharpe regards
the Lesser Redpoll (A. rufescens) as a subspecies of A. linaria, but distinguishes
A. hornemanni as a subspecies of A. exilipes, the latter being considered a different
species from the Mealy Redpoll, on account of its greyer rump. When no two
Ornithologists agree as to the limits of various closely-related types, the evidence
in favour of these all belonging to one species would seem to be very strong
indeed. Nevertheless, as regards Great Britain, the two Redpolls usually met with
are sufficiently distinct to be separately treated.
Dr. Sharpe gives the distribution of our Mealy Redpoll as:-"Northern Europe,
across Siberia to North America, wintering in more southern localities."
To Great Britain this bird is a more or less irregular winter visitor; Howard
Saunders states that it "is a regular winter visitor to Shetland, from September
onwards, and the track of its migration appears to be principally along the east
coast in Scotland, and the north of England, for the bird is rarer, and of more
uncertain occurrence on the west side. South of Durham its visits become
irregular; in the eastern counties it has occasionally been obtained in spring, and
exceptionally in summer; and in some years large flocks have been noticed down
to the Channel; but in Cornwall it is as yet unknown. In Ireland an example
was taken in co. Kildare, in February, 1876." (Manual British Birds, p. 182).
An example was shot at Achill Island, co. Mayo, according to F. Coburu, Bull.
B.O.U., XII, p. 15.
The male Mealy Redpoll in breeding-plumage has the upper parts pale brown,
lighter on the back and sides of neck, and streaked with blackish-brown; the
forehead crimson; the rump greyish white, suffused with rose-pink; wings dull
blackish; median and greater coverts with pale brown edges and whitish tips;
the quills and primary coverts with greyer edges and narrower tips; tail dark
brown, with paler edges to the feathers, the inner webs margined with white;
base of forehead and lores black; a superciliary streak and a short streak below
the eye whitish; sides of face pale brown, the cheeks slightly rosy; chin black;
throat and breast rose-pink; remainder of under parts buffish-white, becoming
quite white on the under tail-coverts; flanks streaked with blackish-brown; beak
yellowish horn-colour, darker at the tip and more yellow at the base; feet dark
brown; iris hazel.
The female is slightly smaller than the male, and has a rather broader crown;*
Family-CORVIDÆ.
THE HOODED CROW.
Corvus comix, LINN.
FOUND throughout Europe east of about long. 10°, and in Asia extends
north of Turkestan, throughout Asia Minor and Persia into Afghanistan,
and through Palestine into Egypt. Examples from the Persian Gulf have
the pale slate-grey replaced by nearly white, and have been called C. capellanus;
but Siberian birds are intermediate in colour, and the Persian birds can only be
looked upon as a local race."-Seebohm.
An autumn and winter visitant to England and Wales, where a few pairs
have, from time to time, remained to breed; whilst in the Isle of Man it is
believed to breed regularly. Throughout Scotland and Ireland it is pretty
generally distributed, resident and common, interbreeding occasionally with the
Carrion-Crow in the former country and in Wales.
The typical Hooded Crow has the head, throat, and front of breast, wings,
tail, and thighs black, with purple and green gloss; remainder of plumage ashy-
grey, with the exception of the centre of the upper tail-coverts which is blackish,
becoming quite black close to the tail; bill and feet black; iris dark brown. The
female is similar in plumage, but browner on mantle and slightly smaller, the
bill is larger, but broader when seen from above, and with heavier lower mandible.
The young are duller in colour.
There is a large migration of Scandinavian Hoodies southwards at the
approach of winter, to which fact we owe our seasonal visitation.
The late Henry Stevenson in his "Birds of Norfolk," says:-"The Royston
or Grey-backed Crow, as this species is also called, visits us in autumn in large
numbers, arriving about the first week in October, though occasionally earlier, and
leaves again by the end of March or beginning of April. They frequent for the
most part the broads and marshes near the rivers, particularly the mouths of tidal
streams, and are extremely numerous on the sea coast, where they also gradually
collect together towards the time of their departure in spring. It is fortunate for
Norfolk that this destructive species leaves us so regularly in the breeding-season,
as no greater enemy to the game-keeper probably exists, neither eggs nor young
when caterpillars and aphides, but especially the latter, are abundant, the Sparrow
makes itself somewhat useful in the country, although it must be admitted that
he drives away many more strictly insectivorous birds who could do the same
work far more efficiently.
On the other hand both to the gardener and farmer the Sparrow is a positive
scourge, completely ruining beds of young carnations, or borders of crocuses and
primroses, breaking tender shoots in its ponderous struggles to secure insects,
scattering earth right and left over freshly gravelled paths in its search for newly
sown flower-seeds; sampling peas, fruit, and grain of all kinds in abundance.
Moreover, even the insects which it devours when feeding its young, only represent
a portion of their diet; whole rows of young beans and lettuce are devoured and
partly digested by the parents for the same purpose: it must also be borne in
mind that even the holding capacity of the ever hungry Sparrow is limited, and
that it feeds its young from the crop for some days after they leave the nest (as
anyone may see, who watches the birds in his garden, or in the thoroughfares of
cities and villages) so that there is by no means that incessant destruction of
noxious insects during the rearing of a Sparrow's progeny, which renders the
Titmice such enormous benefactors to the fruit-grower.*
The young town-bred Sparrow, instead of being nourished on clean partly
digested grain, young vegetables, and insects, has to put up with all kinds of
refuse and garbage, and when it leaves the nest and is almost able to peck for
itself, I have sometimes been amused to see its mother satisfy its cry for food
by scooping up a beakful of mud out of a half-dried puddle and emptying it into its
gaping mouth: it is not surprising that we sometimes see city-bred birds with ruffled
plumage and dull eyes, almost too ill to get out of the way of approaching vehicles.
The nest of the House-Sparrow is placed in any suitable hole or crevice
either in buildings, trees, or banks, on projecting bricks amongst ivy growing
over walls, on beams in barns against a wall or upright support, in nests of House-
and Sand-Martins; but in nearly all such situations its nest is not characteristic,
being either extremely untidy and almost shapeless, or formed like that of most
Finches in cup-fashion, though with somewhat less regular walls. The more
typical nest is built in the branches of trees, hedges, and (according to Dixon)
in furze-bushes; it is a very bulky bag-shaped structure, the entrance being either
close to, or at the top, so that the light falls more or less directly into the cavity:
this form of nest is also usually built on beams in barns, and I once found a
nest itself is built of dead grasses and bents, and the lining consists of rootlets
and hair: altogether it is so large that the Wood-Pigeon has been known to add
a few twigs to it, and thus adapt it to its own purposes.* The eggs number
from four to six, though five is the usual complement; they are pale bluish or
buffish-green in colour, and vary in pattern between that of the Common-and
Reed-Buntings, the surface spots, blotches, and streaks being deep pitch-brown,
with underlying spots of lilacine-grey: in size and form they correspond pretty
closely with eggs of the Common Bunting.
The flight of the Hawfinch is rapid and powerful, somewhat undulating when
the bird is passing from tree to tree, but more direct when long distances are
covered. On the wing it often utters a peculiar clicking sound, a kind of tic,
which may also sometimes be heard when the bird is caged.
The food consists largely of seeds, those of the hornbean being much relished;
but when feeding its young it devours insects, especially caterpillars, and probably
buds; later in the year peas, cherry-kernels, beech-mast, yew-berries, and haws
are eaten. In confinement sunflower-seeds, hemp, oats, beech-nuts, canary, and
millet may be given.
Personally I have had but little experience of the Hawfinch as a cage-bird.
On September 14th, 1893, a birdcatcher brought me a specimen which had flown
into his nets: he was evidently afraid to handle it, and cautioned me against
attempting to touch it without gloves, saying that its bite was frightful and drew
blood; however I soon had the bird in my hand and caged it; but, although I
placed the cage on a high shelf, the Hawfinch never became tame, but so wore
the feathers of its wings and tail by its efforts to escape, that when after a few
weeks of captivity it died, the skin was not worth preserving. I am, therefore,
convinced that the Hawfinch should either be turned into a large aviary, or be
hand-reared.
Speaking of a pair taken from the nest and brought to him in 1880, the late Lord
Lilford says:-"My two caged Hawfinches * * readily devoured meal-worms and
house-flies, but I imagine that this is an unnatural and acquired taste." In this
I think his Lordship was in error, for there can be nothing unnatural in a bird
largely reared upon partly digested caterpillars, subsequently eating mealworms.
Ripe apples would probably be a welcome addition to its prison-diet; for, according
to Mr. Horatio Fillmer, of Brighton, the Black-tailed Hawfinch is especially
fond of fruit.
As a pet the Hawfinch has but little to recommend it; it is not a pretty
according to Mr. Seebohm, not only the commonest, but also the most widely
distributed bird on the tundras. In Asia it migrates further southwards than in
Europe, reaching to about 30° N. lat. in China; whereas it is rare in the south
of Russia and in Northern Italy, and as yet unknown in Spain. In Central
Europe its occurrences are accidental, but further north they are naturally more
frequent, and are regular on Heligoland in autumn. In America this species
breeds throughout the far north; wintering in South Carolina, Kansas, and
Colorado." (Howard Saunders, Manual of British Birds, pp. 213-214).
To Great Britain this species is an occasional, though not very infrequent
visitor; upwards of forty examples apparently having been obtained previous to
1890, since Selby first recognized the bird, amongst some Larks forwarded to
Leadenhall Market from Cambridgeshire, early in 1826. Since 1890 this species
has visited us more frequently. In October and November, 1892, J. H. Gurney
stated that at least fifty-six were netted and shot in Norfolk. In the following
year considerable numbers were seen on the Lincolnshire coast, a good many were
recorded as having passed along the downs in February. In November of the
same year a flock of from sixty to eighty was seen near Flamborough by Matthew
Bailey, and later a flock of from a hundred to a hundred and twenty by J.
Cordeaux. In the Zoologist for 1894, the late Rev. H. A. Macpherson stated
that in the southern counties a few had been taken annually for the past dozen
years near Dover, but that in November, 1893, only three were caught near
Brighton. In 1900 Mr. Patterson reported their annual occurrence in greater or
less numbers in Norfolk, and occurrences of the species in Sussex, Warwick,
Yorkshire, Scotland, and Ireland have been recorded up to 1907.
The male in breeding-plumage has the head, including the throat, and the
breast velvety-black; a broad white superciliary stripe extends backwards over the
ear-coverts, and is continued downwards on the sides of the neck; across the back
of the neck is a broad collar of bright chestnut; the remainder of the upper
surface (including the wing-coverts and secondaries) is blackish, the feathers
bordered with tawny-buff, or creamy-whitish; the primaries and tail-feathers deep
brown, with narrow ashy margins, the two outer pairs of tail-feathers with elon-
gated dull white patches on the inner webs: remainder of under surface creamy-
white, with black streaks on the flanks: beak yellow, tipped with black; feet
blackish-brown; iris hazel. The female is paler above and without the defined
collar on the nape, the feathers of the crown have tawny-margins, and a whitish
stripe runs down the centre of the head: the ear-coverts are brown, partly edged
with blackish; the cheeks and under surface are creamy white: a black line run-
ning below the cheeks to the upper throat, where the feathers are also black,
roots, and quantities of dead leaves. It is lined with one or two scraps of moss,
a few pieces of fine grass, and a great quantity of short hair."
The eggs of the Cirl Bunting vary much less than those of the Yellow
Bunting; but Seebohm states that some of them have a greenish-white ground-
tint.
Lord Lilford says:-"The few nests I have met with were all placed on steep
banks by the side of a road or footway, amongst low bushes and herbage, and
were built of moss and grass-stalks, with a lining of cow's hair."
Herr Gätke (Birds of Heligoland, p. 371), states that he has only twice
obtained this Bunting on the island; he gives Zaunammer as the German trivial
name of the species; but Von Homeyer (in the Gefiederte Welt, 1891, p. 444)
applies this name to Emberiza cia, using the term Zippammer (used for the Meadow
Bunting alone by Gätke), in a generic sense. If two such distinct species as
Emberiza cirlus and E. cia are each called "The Hedge Bunting" by well-known
writers, the confusion respecting them is likely to be as fruitful of mischief as the
incorrect application of the trivial name of Black-headed Bunting to Emberiza
schæniclus has been in England.
The food of this species is similar to that of its congeners; consisting largely
of grasshoppers, beetles, moths, caterpillars, and spiders, during the breeding-
season; but in autumn and winter, of various seeds and grain. In confinement
it lives well on the usual mixed seeds, including oats, with the addition of an
occasional mealworm, cockroach, or spider.
Like most of the British Buntings, the Cirl Bunting (if kept in an aviary)
is, as Lord Lilford observes, "dull, silent, and greedy." Rarely one may hear
it sing, once or twice perhaps in the course of a month: it is not, however, an
aggressive bird; and, when it does show itself, makes a pretty addition to a
collection of Finches. My late friend, Mr. Phillip Crowley, purchased a pair at the
Crystal Palace Show some years ago, and turned them out into his mixed garden
aviary, where, I believe, they lived for several years; but one which I had (I think
in 1893 or 1894), only survived for about a twelvemonth, dying suddenly without
apparent cause.
at which several Sparrows and Chaffinches were already busy. I had this bird in
full view for some minutes, as he hopped about and regaled himself, till he was
attacked by a Sparrow, and flew up to the tree from whence he had come." *
The song of the Cirl Bunting differs from that of the Yellow Hammer chiefly
in the absence of the terminal double note; it has, therefore, been compared with
that of the Lesser Redpoll and Lesser Whitethroat. The call-note of the young
and adult are said by the late Mr. Witchell to be "not unlike the call-squeak of
the Tree Pipit"; according to Seebohm the adult call-note "sounds like a
monotonous and plaintive chea-che."
Subsequent to taking my first nest of the Cirl Bunting in 1877, I frequently
heard and occasionally saw the cock-bird in the same neighbourhood, but I did
not obtain a nest again till 1884, when I found two at Tunstall, the first on the
24th and the second on the 30th of May: four years later I obtained permission
to nest in some private grounds near Frinstead, in Kent, and on the 26th May I
took my fourth and last nest of this species.
The Cirl Bunting appears to be double-brooded, the first nest being usually
built some time in May, and the second in July. The sites chosen for the nest
are very similar to those selected by the Yellow Bunting: according to Howard
Saunders who found it not uncommon on the chalk-hills of Surrey, it "is placed
in a bank among the stems of a hazel or other bush, though sometimes in furze,
or juniper, at a little distance from the ground." My nests were all found within
a foot or two above the earth, the first in a stunted furze-bush tangled with a
blackberry vine, two others in low juniper scrub overrun with bramble, and the
fourth in a young hawthorn bush.
The nest is tolerably compact internally, though externally somewhat loosely
put together, the outer wall usually consisting of coarse dead grass, bents, and
vegetable fibre; the lining of fine fibre and black horse-hair; occasionally a little
moss is said to be used in the lining; but this material is rarely used by any of
the British Buntings. The eggs number from four to five (my nests contained
respectively four, four, three, and two eggs) and are often somewhat broader than
those of the Yellow Hammer, they are white, generally very faintly tinged with
lilac; streaked, spotted, and dotted with purplish-black, especially towards the
larger end; with small, and frequently indistinct lilacine-greyish shell-spots. The
markings often terminate in round blots; and, occasionally, some of the streaks
are chocolate. Seebohm describes an abnormal nest in his collection as "somewhat
loosely put together, and made externally of various plant-stems, blades of grass,
the same situations as the Calandra; they prefer fallow ground, nesting under
shelter of some clod or in any slight depression of the ground. I never could
find the nest, except by putting the old bird off."
Howard Saunders says:-"During the breeding-season the bird frequents
dry and sandy soil, and plains where the herbage is somewhat scanty; while its
tameness is such as often to cause difficulty in shooting a specimen for identification
without blowing it to pieces, and I have seen a bird cut down with a whip in
the road. The male utters his short and feeble song while perched on some clod
or low wall, or during a brief, undulating, and somewhat jerky flight. In autumn
and winter large flocks are formed."
The season of nidification, as Seebohm has pointed out, of the Short-toed
Lark varies, commencing at dates decided by the conditions of climate in the
countries where it spends its summer; in the warmer regions it begins as early
as April, whilst in colder countries nesting operations may be delayed until June.
The nest, like that of all its allies, is in a slight depression on the ground,
sometimes barely sheltered by irregularities of the soil, but frequently as with
other Larks, placed amongst grass or partly sheltered by a bush. It is of the
ordinary type, and consists of grass-bents, rootlets, down, and sometimes feathers
with a few hairs as a finish to the lining.
The eggs as well as the nest are very similar to those of our Sky-Lark,
excepting in their inferior size, and (as is the case with that bird) a nest will
sometimes only contain a clutch of three; but I have always considered it probable,
when the normal number of eggs is from four to five, as with the Short-toed and
Sky-Larks, that the bird has been disturbed in its first nest and has had to build
again in a hurry. In colouring the eggs are creamy-whitish freely sprinkled
with pale smoky-brown spots and with greyer shell-spots; these markings are
more or less dense in different specimens, sometimes almost concealing the ground-
tint and often with a zone of heavier marking near the larger end; but these
variations are common to all the Larks and might almost be taken for granted.
Jerdon (cf Cat. Birds, E. I. Comp., vol. II, p. 473) observes:-"This bird
appears on the table-land of Southern India in October. It associates in vast
flocks, frequenting the bare grass-downs, and is fond of damp spots, as at the
edge of tanks, etc.; it also frequents grain-fields, and almost always retires to
them for shelter during the heat of the day; from whence it does not in general
issue again till next morning."
In his "Birds of India," vol. II, p. 427, he adds the following facts:-"It
feeds almost entirely on seeds; both runs and hops on the ground, and has a
call-note like that of the real Lark's. Towards the end of March in the south,
be found incubated, but it is doubtful whether so small a number ever represents
a full clutch: in ground-colour they vary a good deal-white, whity-brown, buffish
clay-coloured, or pale olive-green; generally densely mottled with olive or smoky
grey-brown over the entire surface, but frequently with a denser zone at the larger,
and more rarely at the smaller end; sometimes there are a few scattered streaks
and spots of deeper brown. The most aberrant egg which I have seen was one
lent to me for illustration in my "Handbook" (pl. XI, fig. 11), which bears a
curious resemblance to some eggs of the Common Bunting; it is white with a
deep brown patch at the larger end, shading into sienna and slightly macular
along its inferior margin.
Although the Sky-Lark pairs in March, nidification does not commence until
late in April, nests being most numerous towards the end of May; two broods
are reared in the year, the second nest being furnished with eggs late in June or
early in July. Both male and female are very wary in approaching their nest,
never descending close to it, but at some distance, whence they may be seen
threading their way in the most irregular fashion in and out of the herbage
towards it. This is best seen where the nest is somewhat exposed on an open
pasture, the mother-bird wanders about apparently in the most aimless fashion,
but constantly approaching the nest until about a foot from it, when she makes
straight for it and settles down. By watching patiently through a glass one can
thus sometimes discover the nest.
The Sky-Lark's song is so much admired and so well-known that it is hardly
necessary to describe it; it consists mainly of a shaking water-bubble trill, inter-
spersed with long drawn notes, and is marvellously exhilarating, considering how
little variety there is in it. The bird sings either soaring, or perched on a stump
or a thick branch.
In the summer the food of the Sky-Lark consists of spiders, insects, their
larvæ, and worms; but in winter, and more especially during frosty weather, it
gets little else but seeds of grasses, plantain, etc. During the latter season this
species is very gregarious in its habits, and consequently immense numbers are
netted, the male birds usually realizing from 9d. to 1s. apiece, according to whether
they are disposed of to dealers or private persons; the females, as already stated,
are generally killed for the table.
In 1886, I made my first attempt at rearing Sky-Larks from the nest: I
obtained seven young birds about eight days old, and at first kept them in a
basket of hay; but no sooner was this opened than these active little things
bounded out like grasshoppers, often clearing my shoulders and alighting on the
floor behind me. This I considered dangerous, and, therefore, bought a long "Lark-
frequently indistinguishable from those of the Chaffinch; but usually they are
decidedly greener, with smaller and less defined markings; a hen Brambling
formerly in my possession, which must have been taken as a cage-bird to South
America and liberated there (I picked her out of a batch of newly imported
Brazilian Birds) occasionally used to drop an egg from the branch on which she
roosted; these eggs were greenish-blue, like those of a Hedge-Accentor, but with
four or five deep brown spots on sienna-reddish smears towards the larger end;
of course they were always broken when I found them.
Like the Chaffinch, this species feeds largely on insects in the summer time,
and on various kinds of seed in the winter, it is especially fond of beech-mast,
but also eats the seeds of many noxious weeds, and fruit. On the ground it both
runs and hops, but chiefly the former.
The call-note is usually described as a harsh chirp, probably referring to the
grating zshweeo which it utters (in common with the Greenfinch, the Baya and
Manyar Weavers, and many other birds); if so I have no hesitation in asserting
positively that this is its note of defiance, inasmuch as it not only utters it after
its song, but when disputing with another bird. I suspect the true call-note to
be a sharp whit. The alarm-note according to Seebohm is a hurried ziv, ziv, but
I have not heard this note from any of the birds which I have kept. The song,
which I have frequently heard sung by two of my male Bramblings, is very like
that of the Chaffinch without the terminal notes; as, however, it is generally
followed, almost immediately, by the harsh cry of defiance, it would almost seem
as if this might represent the wheat-ear or tissi-ear of that species. The scale of
the Brambling is rather shorter than in the song of the Chaffinch, and delivered
with less vehemence; but in this respect individuals may differ.
A pair of Bramblings formed part of the little collection with which I com-
menced my studies in aviculture: I kept them with a pair of Goldfinches, a Hedge-
Accentor, and one or two other birds, in a large home-made flight cage. These
were the worst-tempered Bramblings I ever had, they disputed incessantly, and at
first gave the hen Goldfinch a wretched time of it, viciously pecking her whenever
she went down to feed near them; but one day the cock Brambling made a mis-
take and pecked the male Goldfinch, which simply sprang at him, grasped his body
with its claws, and tore a bunch of feathers from his breast. After this both
Goldfinches were let alone, but the male and female Bramblings fought incessantly,
the hen eventually pecking out one of her husband's eyes, soon after which he died:
curiously enough she only survived him a few days.
In 1886 I purchased a charming male bird of this species, so gentle and tame
that its plumage was always in perfect condition; it was passionately fond of bath-
there is no such trifling with the second structure. Although a late breeder, not
commencing nidification before the middle of May, the Twite is double-brooded.
It is probable, as in the case of allied species, that this bird feeds partly
upon small caterpillars, as well as the leaves and unripe seeds of weeds. In con-
finement it is passionately fond of soft food.
From time to time I have had Twites brought to me by bird-catchers; and,
in 1889, I purchased two males and turned them loose in one of my cool aviaries:
they very soon became fairly tame, but nothing like so confiding as Redpolls;
they, nevertheless, sang from the first. Most birds are selfish, but very few are
so persistently greedy, and spiteful withal, as Twites: I had some Canaries in
the same aviary; and, as they had barely completed their moult, a saucer of egg-
food was daily placed in the aviary for their benefit; no sooner, however, did the
Twites discover that egg was good, than they simply took possession of the saucer,
savagely attacking every Canary that attempted to come near it until their some-
what voracious appetite was sated.
In the spring of the following year my Twites began to assume the rosy
colouring on the lower back and rump, but before they had fully developed it,
they caught septic enteritis from a sick Canary, and, early in June, both of them
died. I never cared to purchase others.
In the first volume of the "Avicultural Magazine," p. 118, Mr. G. C. Swailes,
of Beverley, Yorks., gives the following interesting account of his experiments
in breeding Twites in confinement:-"A pair of Twites (Acanthis flavirostris) have
this season bred and reared young in my small aviary, and as it is, I believe, a
rather uncommon occurrence, a few notes may be acceptable * * * * * *
The birds are a very interesting pair, both being abnormally coloured-the cock
about half white pied, and the hen pure white (the latter may be known to some
of my readers, as it has been exhibited at both the Palace and Aquarium shows).
They are kept with about half a dozen other Finches in an aviary quite out in
the country.
The hen commenced to build on May 14th, and laid her first egg on the
17th, laying altogether five eggs and sitting closely after the third was laid. I
did not again look at the eggs, but saw the old birds busy feeding on the 2nd
of June and following days. I looked in the nest on the 8th, hoping to find some
fine young birds, but the nest contained only one poor starved thing which died
on the following day: the weather was very stormy at the time they were hatched
and I think this was the cause of their doing so badly.
On the 15th I noticed that the hen had nearly completed another nest, and
she laid on the 16th and three following days: having a Redpoll nesting at the
Siskin as above described. They are exceedingly tame, and may be very closely
watched as they cluster like bees on some hanging sprays, searching for buds,
and keeping up an incessant twittering music, pleasant enough, but not by any
means so melodious as that of the Siskin."
Speaking of the nesting of the Lesser Redpoll in various parts of Norfolk,
Henry Stevenson says:-"In these localities, the nests have been mostly found
in the apple and cherry trees, but Mr. Alfred Newton in a communication to Mr.
Hewitson (Eggs British Birds, 3rd Ed.) remarks that near Thetford, where it also
breeds yearly, the nests are placed 'close to the trunk of the tree in plantations
of young larch and firs of no great height,' though he once found one at least
sixty feet from the ground, and placed near the outer end of a branch."
In his "Notes on the Birds of Donegal," (Zoologist, 1891, p. 336) H. C. Hart
says of Lesser Redpolls:-"I have noted them in May settling themselves about
Glenalla in small flocks, and scattering to breed. About Rathmullan and Carra-
blagh they are also frequent in summer. In winter these birds come to roost,
with several other species, every night in the plantations round my house at
Carrablagh, where there is the best shelter for several miles. 'Very common
about Killybegs in the breeding season. Have known four nests in the hedge-
rows along the first mile of the Donegal road from here, in the same season.'-
(A.B.)."
Speaking of the species as observed by him in Wales, E. A. Swainson, of
Brecon, says:-"I have noticed it every summer here for some years, but this
season (1891) it has been unusually common, and I have often heard its musical
little trill and triple flight-note about the alder swamps and adjacent hedges. In
June last I found two nests of this bird, placed in honeysuckle growing in tall
hedges, each containing fresh eggs. Both nests had the usual lining of white
down, but one was peculiar in having a quantity of honeysuckle bark-strips inter-
woven amongst the grass round the outside of the nest. This beautiful little nest
contained four eggs, of a bright blue-green, blotched, two of them very boldly,
with reddish-brown."
As a cage-bird the Lesser Redpoll is usually a great favourite, chiefly on
account of its tameness and a certain amount of reasoning capacity which it
possesses, whereby it has discovered, under the pressure of hunger and thirst, that
it can pull up with its beak and hold with its claw little pails or waggons con-
taining its food or water: it is by no means the only bird which has been taught
this senseless trick, but many thoughtless bird-lovers seem to consider that all
captives (even birds) ought to be compelled to work for their living. I have seen
the process of teaching this bird in all its stages, and consider it anything but kind.
in its gait and manner of looking up, with the neck stretched out, reminded me
of the actions of a quail. In the aviary of Mr. J. H. Gurney, this bird assumed
its full summer plumage in the following spring, and thrived so well in its new
abode, that over-feeding was probably the cause of its death in May, 1856, when
for the second time, it had acquired the black head and plumage of the breeding
season, and was certainly a perfect lump of fat when skinned for the purpose of
preservation." (Birds of Norfolk, Vol. I, p. 181).
The food of this species consists largely of insects in the summer and seeds
in the winter; but in confinement it should be treated like the other Buntings.
It is undoubtedly the most desirable of all the British Buntings for the aviculturist,
and should certainly be freely imported as a cage-bird.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE SNOW-BUNTING.
Plectrophenax nivalis, LINN.*
ACIRCUMPOLAR species, breeding chiefly in the Arctic regions beyond the
limit of forest growth; or at high elevations further south, excepting in
the Faroe Islands and Shetlands where it places its nest little above the
sea-level. In winter it migrates southwards to Central Europe, South Russia,
Turkestan, North China, Japan, and north America as far south as Georgia. It
has been known to visit the Azores, Morocco, Malta; and is a rare, but regular,
winter visitor to Italy.
To Great Britain the Snow-Bunting is chiefly a winter visitor, generally
reaching the eastern coast of England in October, though rarely in September, and
commencing its return migration from March to April. Although rare in England
Persia, Turkestan, and Siberia as far as Irkutsk. In winter it visits India, Arabia,
and Africa to the Cape of Good Hope."
In Great Britain the Spotted Flycatcher breeds in suitable localities in every
county, but in England and Wales it is far more abundant, and more generally
distributed than in Scotland and Ireland: its distribution in the latter island is
certainly local, and it is probable that some counties are unsuited to its requirements.
The colouring of this bird is decidedly sombre, its upper surface being brown,
slightly paler and with dark shaft-streaks on the crown; the wings and tail darker
brown, with paler margins to the wing-coverts and secondaries: its under surface
is greyish-white; the breast and flanks slightly buff-brownish, and streaked with
brown, as also is the throat; bill dark brown; feet black; iris dark hazel. The
female greatly resembles the male, but is somewhat browner and is more heavily
streaked on the underparts. The young have buff centres to the feathers of the
upper surface, whilst the wing-coverts, secondaries, and tail-coverts are tipped with
this colour.
The Spotted Flycatcher haunts the outskirts of woods, high hedges on the
borders of parks and pleasure grounds, plantations of hazel, orchards, and gardens,
and in such places it breeds, usually placing its nest either in a slight depression
in the branch of a tree, frequently near the trunk, or on the branch of a fruit-tree
trained against a wall; it has, however, been known to build in crevices of the
bark of old trees, in trellis-work overgrown with creepers, and I have taken the
nest from the hollow top of a tree stump, from a tall hawthorn hedge, and one in
my collection was taken from a narrow hole in a wall.* The form of the nest
varies in accordance with its surroundings; if placed upon a branch or in the top
of a hedge it is circular, if on a fruit-branch trained against a wall, semicircular,
and the nest which I obtained from a hole in a wall was of the exact shape of a small
slipper; the materials of the nest also vary somewhat, but they generally consist
of twigs and roots, or fine grasses, mixed with a quantity of green moss interwoven
with spiders' webs, and lined with fine grass, hair, and sometimes two or three
feathers. The eggs vary in number from three to six, five being the most usual
number, the ground colour being frequently pale pea-green, but sometimes bluish-
white, blotched, zoned, mottled or spotted with various depths of ferruginous red-
brown; when the mottling is very dense the egg, excepting in its inferior size
and narrower shape, somewhat reminds one of that of the Robin, and when the
markings are chiefly represented by a zone near the larger end, it vaguely suggests
that of the Greenfinch.
brighter than the colouring of its back, and this colouring becomes permanent.
I only became aware of the fact after I had completed the rearing of a fine young
bird which was given to me; but my statement has since been confirmed by Mr.
Meade-Waldo and others.
Not many years ago this was a tolerably common bird in the Kentish woods;
nevertheless I but rarely found its nest, not more than three or four times at
most. I can only suppose that, in that county, the Jay may have been so perse-
cuted, that it has to some extent departed from its customary plan of building
low down; and, like the Magpie, has made its home in the inaccessible branches
of some lofty tree: that such a proceeding would not be unprecedented is clear
from the fact that Sterland described a nest which he found at the top of a beech
tree, fifty or sixty feet from the ground.
The Jay is essentially a bird of the woods and is far more frequently heard
than seen on account of its extreme wariness; now and again you may come suddenly
upon it and catch a glimpse of its showy plumage as it flaps irregularly across
some opening into the sheltering foliage, screaming harshly as it flies-chaik, chaik,
chaik: indeed I once disturbed a company of five in a small clearing. The alarm
note often commences with a frightened sort of whine; it is very harsh arrgh,
arrgh.
Seebohm gives a singularly accurate account of the habits of this bird in a
state of freedom:-"The Jay becomes noisiest in the evening; and its discordant
notes may then be heard together with those of the Pheasant and the Magpie.
Numbers of the birds call together, or answer each other from different parts of
the cover, and, with the note of the Wood-Owl and the purr of the Nightjar, make
a concert sounding singularly uncanny amidst the gloom of the forest. The
flight of the Jay is a somewhat laboured one, performed very irregularly and with
rapid beatings of the wings. The Jay's peculiar flight is seen to the greatest per-
fection when the bird is flying in the open; for in the thick cover they appear to
scurry off amongst the branches, anxious to conceal themselves as soon as possible.
In spring the Jay may sometimes be observed to fly at a considerable elevation
above its native woods, and, suddenly closing its wings to shoot downwards like
an arrow into the cover below. Although capable of long-sustained flight, in this
country it rarely flies far, preferring to go from tree to tree or to pursue its way
through the tangled undergrowth. When perched in a tree the Jay sits well upright,
its tail sometimes wafted to and fro, its head constantly turned from side to side,
and its crest erected or depressed, its restless actions showing its wariness and
timidity at being so far from cover. When thus perched the Jay can sometimes
be approached very closely; and it is a noteworthy fact, that singularly beautiful
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE LINNET.
Acanthis cannabina, LINN.
BREEDS throughout Europe south of lat. 64° in Scaudinavia, and of lat. 59°
in East Russia; it is also resident in North-west Africa, the Canaries, and
Madeira; eastward it extends to Turkestan. In Persia and North India
a representative race replaces it, in which the general plumage is more ashy, and
the breast of the male more scarlet in colouring.
Excepting in the mountainous parts of Scotland, where it appears to be replaced
by the Twite, the Linnet is pretty generally distributed throughout Great Britain;
it has, however, been rarely seen in the Shetland Isles.
The male Linnet in breeding plumage has a glossy crimson patch from the
base of the upper mandible to the centre of the crown; remainder of head, nape,
and sides of neck brown, with an ashy suffusion and darker mottling; back and
wing-coverts ruddy golden-brown, broadly centred with dark brown; upper tail-
coverts dark brown, with broad buffish-white borders; tail-feathers black, the outer
web narrowly, and the inner web broadly bordered with white; flight feathers
blackish, the primaries with a conspicuous white stripe on the outer webs, and
with a broad whitish-ash border along a great part of the inner webs; secondaries
bordered, especially along the outer webs, with ruddy golden-brown; lores, a streak
above and another below the eye, buffish; ear-coverts and sides of face greyish;
chin and throat buffish-white, with small brown streaks; throat and breast crimson,
somewhat suffused with chestnut in youngish birds; belly buffish-white; flanks
tawny brown, with darker centres to the feathers, and sometimes slightly tinted
with rose-reddish; beak greyish horn-brown, paler at the base of the lower man-
dible; feet brown; iris hazel. In captivity all crimson disappears from the plumage,
and both beak and feet become paler and flesh-tinted.
The female differs in the absence of all crimson colouring; the entire upper
surface browner, with blackish centres to the feathers, the much more prominent
streaking of the under surface, the decidedly broader crown and base of beak, and
the considerably narrower white outer margins to the primaries and tail feathers.
It also differs remarkably in the form of the wings the distinctions being precisely
later in the year, fruit, beech-mast, acorns, and all kinds of refuse, including
carrion, are eaten.
Not only is the Jackdaw keen-sighted, as I shall presently show, but its scent
would seem to be very acute: My friend Mr. J. C. Pool, of Birmingham, wrote
(11th January, 1896), respecting a nest of this species which he found:-"The
nest was in a hole in a decaying tree about fifteen feet from the ground. I
climbed the tree, and on looking into the hole I saw a number of young ones
which seemed to be a week or ten days old. In order to ascertain the number
of young, I took three out of the nest and held them in my hand, while I looked
again into the nest and found only one remained. I then replaced the three in
the nest and left them. Next morning I passed by the bottom of the tree and
was surprised to see a young Jackdaw lying on the ground dead, and as I was
certain I had placed the three young ones properly into the nest, and also that
they could not possibly have fallen out, the nest being fully two feet below the
entrance, I again mounted the tree. Half-way up to the nest I found a second
young one lying on a branch, dead, and a third lying on a ledge inside the hole
of the tree, but about a foot from the nest. One young one still remained in
the nest alive and strong. I did not touch this one, but I subsequently observed
the old birds flying to the nest with food.
I think there is little doubt that the old birds threw out the three that I
had had in my hands, probably because they had contracted the scent. I was
visiting my friend on whose ground the tree is, last week, and I found the Jackdaws
have again nested in the same hole, but they had not hatched then. If I can
get over again before the young ones leave the nest I will try the experiment
again and test them."
Later in the year Mr. Pool wrote:-"I did not have a chance of confirming
the matter of Jackdaws, for when I went to do so, I found someone had been
before me and had taken the young ones."
In captivity, in spite of the fact that its imitative faculty is inferior to that
of the Raven, Magpie, or Jay, as also that it is the most incorrigible thief of all
the Crows, the Jackdaw is a very general favourite. It is always full of mischief
and takes quite as much delight in practical jokes as its owner gets from watching
their performance: there is something irresistibly funny in watching a Jackdaw
and a cat together; the latter anxious to indulge her selfish and indolent nature,
by curling up in the sun to sleep away the best hours of the day; whilst the
Jackdaw, equally bent on keeping her awake, slips up behind and tweaks her tail.
Before the cat can spring to her feet, swearing and spitting, the Jackdaw has
hopped sideways under a chair; and, as she swings round to avenge herself, he
Family-HIRUNDINIDÆ.
THE SWALLOW.
Hirundo rustica, LINN.
THE Swallow breeds throughout the greater part of Europe, Asia, north of
the great mountain ranges, and Northern Africa: in winter it has been
obtained all over India, to Burma and Malaysia, and throughout Africa:
exceptional cases of its occurrence in East Finmark, Spitzbergen, and Nova Zembla
have been recorded.
Throughout Great Britain the Swallow is generally distributed, although it is
said rarely to breed in Shetland, and never in the Outer Hebrides. According to
Capt. Feilden it is common in the Faroes, in May, but is not known to nest
there. At the season of migration the Swallow collects into flocks, and Mr. Fro-
hawk, in September (about the 28th or 30th), counted 113 sitting on one stretch
of telegraph wire at Buckland, in South Devon.
In adult plumage this species has the forehead chestnut, upper parts prussian-
blue, wings and tail brown, with the outer webs of the feathers bluish-green; the
inner web of the innermost greater wing-covert greyish-white; all the tail-feathers
excepting the central pair, with white patches on the inner webs: under parts
almost white, the throat chestnut; a belt of prussian-blue across the breast; under
wing-coverts and belly buffish; bill and feet black; iris hazel. The female chiefly
differs from the male in the shorter tapering outer tail feathers, somewhat duller
colouring, whiter under parts, and narrower breast-belt. Young birds are duller,
with the chestnut portions paler, and the spots on the tail somewhat rufous.
It is believed that the Swallow pairs for life, and it is certain that it returns
year after year to the same breeding spot, sometimes even utilizing the previous
year's nest; it is naturally a gregarious bird; though perhaps not so much so as
the House- and Sand-Martins; where one nest occurs, in chimney, barn, or out-
house, there are sure to be three or four close by, but I never observed more than
half a dozen or so, even in the largest barn, whereas it is not unusual to see eight
or ten nests of the House-Martin under the eaves of a house, whilst the occupied
burrows of Sand-Martins in a single sand-bank frequently number from twenty to
thirty.
The situation of the nest is said to be always on a not very tall pine-tree,
from eighteen to twenty-five feet from the ground, on a branch against the stem.
It is about a foot in diameter, about five inches in depth, with the cavity four
inches in diameter, and from one and a half to two inches in depth. The
foundation is composed of lichen-covered twigs of larch and spruce, finished off
with fresh birch-twigs, and lined with dry grass and the inner bark of trees, with
a little loose earth; the final lining is grass, generally dry, but sometimes fresh."
The number of eggs is from three to five; they are bluish or creamy-white, with
the surface-spots olive or leather-brown, and with grey shell-spots: in the distri-
bution of the markings and their size they vary much as in other Corvidæ.
Although, in the winter, Seebohm says that "Their tameness was quite absurd.
They allowed us to go within three feet of them; and sometimes they even
permitted us to touch them with a stick," this confidence disappears during the
breeding-season when they become very shy and wary.
The food of the Nutcracker consists of insects of all kinds and their larvæ,
the larger dung-beetles having been found in its stomach, as well as many other
species of different Orders, seeds of conifers, nuts, acorns, berries, etc. It is
probable that it also devours the eggs and newly hatched young of other birds.
Seebohm mentions two notes:-the first, which he considers to be the call-
note, is a sort of plaintive kray, kray; the other, which he thinks is the alarm-note
is a loud grating kr-kr-kr.
The following notes respecting the Nutcracker in captivity were kindly
forwarded to me by the late Rev. H. A. Macpherson.
"It was early in the year 1893 that a pair of Nutcrackers entered my
possession. I understood that the London dealer from whom I purchased them
had received them from Hungary. They were in fine condition, and I placed
them in an out-door aviary. The plumage of these birds was identical, but the
male was a finer and larger bird than his companion. Their lively movements
recalled my observations of this species in the Bernese Oberland. All their actions
were sprightly and animated. The agility with which the Nutcracker hops from
one branch of pine to another resembles the action of the Common Jay. These
tame birds lived upon Spanish nuts. We usually broke the nuts open for them,
but they could perform the task for themselves. The Nutcracker first inserts a
nut into a suitable crevice, and then breaks it with repeated blows of the bill.
The nut is then shelled, and the kernel is swallowed, the outside being allowed
to fall to the ground.
The male bird seemed to tyrannize over his mate, at least he gave her many
sly pecks which she accepted as a matter of course. They differed occasionally
much, at times almost approaching black. Seebohm speaks of a variety of rare
occurrence which is "reddish-white in ground-colour, spotted with rich reddish-
brown and splashed with violet-grey." Of the examples represented on our plate
figs. 229, 231, and 232 are from Mr. A. B. Farn's collection; fig. 230 is one of
a series of eggs collected some years since and given to me by my friend Dr.
Vincent Blachford, who took them at Charlton All Saints, near Salisbury.
The commonest note of the Raven has been variously described as cruck,
cruck, or pruck, pruck; to me it sounds like whurk, whurk; its note of rage has
been described as "a menacing bark" and "an angry hoarse growl."
The food consists of grain, berries, fruit, insects, worms, mollusca, reptiles,
batrachians, eggs, young poultry and game, sickly lambs, rats, moles, and carrion
of all kinds.
Mr. E. C. Phillips in a paper on the Birds of Breconshire ("Zoologist," 1882,
pp. 45-46) says:-"This bird lives to a great age. When a boy, in Wiltshire, I
used to pay a visit-generally on a Sunday-to some friends that lived in a
manor house where there was a tame Raven, he was then about twenty years
old, and full of all sorts of mischief and iniquity, but being a great favourite
and a good talker he had pretty much his own way. I remember him well, for
on one occasion he took a small slice out of my leg, ut mos fuit, and retired to
the top of the spout to digest it, amidst my yells and the threats of the whole
party. Happening to be near the place twenty-five years afterwards, I ventured
to ask for my old friend, and to my surprise out he came with the same side-
long hop, the same malicious twinkle in his eye, and looking more sleek and
diabolical than ever. I only heard of his death last autumn. He took a similar
liberty with a large dog that he did with my leg, and got a nip in return that
killed him. He must have been fifty years old when he died, and was one of
the finest birds I have ever seen."
Lord Lilford's account of his Ravens is very entertaining, especially that of
his bird Sankey:-"He would take any opportunity that presented itself of
testing the consistency of the lower garments or shoe-leather of an unwary male
of our species; but we seldom heard of his attacking a woman. At any strange
dog, large or small, he 'went in,' and after bestowing a hearty dig on his
hinder parts, used to retire to some coign of vantage and mock his foe, with an
often-repeated 'bow-wow,' uttered in a complacent and sympathetic tone, which
must have been peculiarly aggravating to the injured one."
"Any superfluous food was generally hidden away for future consumption,
and the hiding-places often quaintly chosen; e.g. we once saw the Raven care-
fully part the long feathers on the back of one of our Emus, insert a small fish
Family-ALAUDIDÆ.
THE WOOD-LARK.
Alauda arborea, LINN.
IN summer the Wood-Lark inhabits the southern portions of Scandinavia, and
Russia below about 60° N. lat., as far east as the Ural Mountains, while
in Northern Germany it is common. Southward, it is found in places
suited to its habits-especially in Central France-down to the Mediterranean,
Black and Caspian Seas; its numbers being increased by accessions from the
north in winter, at which season it also visits Northern Africa and Palestine, and
in the latter it is said to breed on the high ground."-Howard Saunders.
In Great Britain the Wood-Lark is by no means a common bird, and is very
local in its distribution; occurring chiefly on undulating sandy or chalky soil
dotted about with small woods, copses, or plantations. It is most frequently to be
met with in suitable localities in the southern counties of England and Wales;
six specimens have been obtained on the Scilly Islands; but has, from time to
time, occurred in most of the northern counties. In Scotland it is very scarce,
but has once been stated to have bred in Stirlingshire. A few appeared from
early in November to about the middle of December, on Fair Isle, in 1906. In
Ireland it is principally confined to the east and south.
In general colouring the Wood-Lark nearly resembles the Sky-Lark, but can
always be distinguished both when perching and on the wing by its short tail.
It is also smaller and has a more slender bill; the bastard primary is much
longer; the blackish centres to the feathers of the upper surface are wanting on
the rump and upper tail-coverts, the primary-coverts have white tips; central tail-
feathers reddish-brown, with dusky centres, outermost feather brown, the outer web
dusky at the tip, the inner web with a broad black patch; remaining feathers
blackish, with terminal triangular white spots; a broad buffish-white superciliary
stripe extending backwards to the nape; ear-coverts rufous, with darker upper
margin; cheeks and throat whitish, becoming distinctly yellowish-buff on the
breast and abdomen; flanks brownish; throat narrowly streaked with black;
breast and flanks broadly streaked; bill dark brown above, paler below; feet light
oases." Also, in his notes quoted by Seebohm (British Birds, Vol. II, p. 85)-
"It is a bird that appears to love the richest districts, and we never met with it
in the pine- and cedar-forests on the Aurès. In the oases the birds inhabited the
luxuriant gardens, the groves of fig-trees, and were seen amongst the apricot-
trees and wealth of shrubs beautifully clothed in the fairest of blooms. But
amongst this semi-tropical verdure, the Serin is difficult to see, and you only
catch a hasty glimpse of it as it appears on the outermost branches for a moment
and then disappears again.
Amongst the date-palms, however, it is very conspicuous. There is little or
no underwood beneath these trees, and the bird perches exclusively upon them.
It was seen sitting on the topmost point of the broad leaves, sixty feet from the
ground, whence it occasionally took a little fluttering flight into the air to catch
an insect from the swarms flitting round the tree-tops. All the Finches in summer-
time are more or less insectivorous, and the little Serin is no exception; indeed
it seems most industrious in its search after insects, not only flitting into the air
but occasionally clinging to the stems of the palm-trees, as if searching for its
food amongst the rugged bark. We repeatedly saw it, too, upon the tops of the
walls that divide the Arab Gardens; but it was always rather shy, and after a
moment or two's rest flew off to its usual refuge, the tops of the date-palms."
The nest is placed either in a fruit-tree, or some other tree of moderate
height, a shrub, or bush; it is loosely but neatly constructed of bents and roots,
compacted together with vegetable down, wool, and spiders' cocoons, or lichen and
grey moss, and is softly lined with similar materials. The eggs number from
four to five, usually five, and chiefly differ from those of the Siskin, or Goldfinch,
in their smaller size, being very pale green, marked with dark reddish-brown
blotches, spots, and sometimes lines, and with underlying sienna-reddish spots;
most specimens are principally marked at the larger end.
The food of the Serin consists chiefly of small seeds, and it is said to give
the preference to those of an oily nature: when rearing its young, however, as
is the case with other Finches in a wild state, various small insects are also eaten,
and doubtless leaves and unripe seeds of weeds.
The call-note somewhat resembles that of a Canary, a plaintive wheet, but the
song is described by Naumann as more nearly like that of a Siskin; and Howard
Saunders says:- "The song resembles the word zi-zi often repeated, and a flock
of birds settled in a tree produces a peculiar buzzing or almost hissing sound."
The bird often sings on the wing after the manner of the Siskin.
The Serin being only subspecifically distinct from the Canary, the fact recorded
by Dr. Carl Russ-that hybrids between the two, proved fertile to the third and
months haunts commons, hedgerows, plantations, small woods, orchards, and shrub-
beries, in all of which situations I have very often found its nest, the latter being
most frequently constructed in a furze-bush or hawthorn-hedge, though I have
taken many a nest from hazel-branches in a plantation, from evergreen and other
shrubs, from tangled bramble, sometimes almost or quite on the ground, from
currant and gooseberry bushes, and even from tufts of heather.
In size, strength, and materials the nest varies considerably, but it is always
tolerably compact, and rarely so large as that of a Greenfinch: among those which
I took under the impression that they differed, I selected eight for my collection
all of them dissimilar in character, five of these which I took in 1883 I thus
described in the "Zoologist" for that year:-"only one had any moss in its con-
struction; this one is somewhat slightly built for the species, but the walls are
strengthened with coarse straws, evidently selected from a dung-hill. The second,
excepting that it is not so deep, is not at all unlike a small nest of the Yellow
Bunting. Its construction is, however, decidedly firmer, and the grasses used in
the walls are similar to what one sees in the nest of the Greater Whitethroat.
The third nest is untidy, loosely put together, and has blackish straggling roots
projecting from the sides. The fourth is unusually deep, and is formed of roots,
fibre and wool, with a few white hairs towards the interior. The fifth is very
ragged in construction, formed of coarse bleached roots, lined with fine fibre and
wool."
The eggs number from four to six, five being the usual clutch; they are
either pale bluish-green or pale buffish; those of young birds being occasionally
unspotted, but most eggs spotted, speckled, blotched, and sometimes (though rarely)
streaked with reddish- and purplish-brown; the markings are usually most numerous
at the larger end, the dark spots now and then forming a subterminal zone.
The flight of this bird is swift and undulating; as it flies it usually twitters;
in the autumn and winter when Linnets collect into flocks, often of considerable
size, and pass over the fields in search of food, this twittering is especially char-
acteristic. The bird-catchers declare that the birds say "tell, tell, tell" as they fly,
and at a distance from the flock you can understand what is meant by this
rendering, but when you get three or four Linnets under a sloping roof in a
good sized aviary, and listen attentively as they fly together from end to end, you
find that what they really say is-"turra, tit, turra, turra, turra."
The ordinary call of the Linnet is a rather high pitched twit, twit; the sexual
call is te-ewy; the call of the young for food is chiwi, chiwi, chiwi; the song, to
my mind, has been too much extolled; it is pretty enough, but there is too
much chuckle and too little brilliance in it; the notes give one the idea of
account of it in his History of British Birds:-"In driving across the steppes
between the Danube and the Black Sea we now and then came upon small flocks
of these birds. At a distance they are indistinguishable from common Starlings;
they run along the ground in the same way, they have the same rapid straight
flight, and the same habit of clustering together. On the ground they feed
with the same eager anxiety, but frequently perch on the stunted bushes, when
their pink colour is very conspicuous. The notes of this bird are almost exactly
the same as those of the Starling, they chatter together in the same way, and in
confinement the low warble mixed with the chatter is very similar in both species.
In most places where this bird breeds it is protected on account of the enormous
number of locusts it devours. In autumn it takes its toll on the fruit (mulberries,
cherries, etc.); but its usefulness in spring is so apparent, that the Greeks and
Turks do not begrudge it so small a trifle. In Asia Minor, as in the Dobrudscha,
I had the misfortune to arrive the day after the fair. Dr. Krüper and I were
informed by our friend Guido von Gonzenbach that the Rose-coloured Starlings
had bred in the previous spring (1871) in enormous numbers in the neighbourhood
of Smyrna, and had devoured the grubs and locusts to the admiration of the
peasantry."
The nest of the Rose-coloured Starling is built in holes or crevices in rocks,
heaps of stones, earth-cliffs, quarries, walls, and old ruins, and is said to be strongly
constructed, not unlike that of a Blackbird; but at times a mere accumulation of
sticks, straws, and various dead plants, with a central depression for the eggs
lined with plant fibre, leaves, moss, and feathers. The eggs number from five to
six, and are glossy white with the faintest bluish tinge.
This species appears to be single-brooded; the hen is a close sitter and is fed
upon the nest by the male bird, chiefly with locusts.
It appears to be generally admitted by Ornithologists that the favourite food
of the Rose-coloured Starling consists in early summer of locusts, and later of
cherries: in confinement it eats cockroaches with avidity: it should certainly
never be fed as that unfortunate example was, which many years ago was winged
at Chelmondiston, in Suffolk, and is said by Messrs. Sheppard and Whitear to
have been kept alive for three months on raw meat. All true Starlings will eat
meat, but it is not good for them, though less injurious than in the case of
members of the family Turdidæ.
Lord Lilford observes that "The Rose-coloured Pastor thrives well in captivity,
but the constant chatter of even a single bird is almost overpowering in a room."
Doubtless this is the case, but no rank-feeding voracious birds are suitable
pets for a dwelling-room, for other reasons: in a bird-room they are more
The food consists chiefly of insects, their larvæ, and small mollusca in summer,
but of seeds in winter; in confinement, however, very little insect food is necessary
to keep this bird in health. In October, 1888, I purchased my first male Reed-
Bunting from a catcher. I turned it into my largest covered aviary, where it
lived a perfectly inoffensive, though stupid and absolutely silent life until 1891;
the winter following the death of this bird my man caught a second (in company
with Skylarks) which also lived about three years, dying before its spring change
of plumage, whilst a third example was given to me and died more quickly. Not
one of these three birds ever uttered the slightest sound, nor have others which
I have owned more recently, and although fairly tame they all showed a skulking
disposition, rarely appearing in the open part of the aviary excepting to feed, and
showing none of that somewhat sprightly activity which characterizes this species
in its wild state. As an aviary bird, I can, therefore, only recommend this
Bunting on account of its quiet beauty of plumage and absolute innocence.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE LAPLAND BUNTING.
Calcarius lapponicus, LINN.
INHABITS the greater part of the circumpolar regions, with the exception of
Iceland-to which it is only an occasional straggler from Greenland-and
Spitzbergen and Novaya Zemlya, whence it has not yet been recorded. It
is only at considerable elevations, such as the Dovre Fjeld, in Norway, that it is
found breeding to the south of the Arctic circle; but east of the North Cape it
is common in Lapland, while in Northern Siberia it is extremely abundant, being,
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-SYLVIINÆ.
PALLAS' WILLOW-WARBLER.
Phylloscopus proregulus.
A single example of this species was obtained in Norfolk, in October, 1896.
A good many Chiffchaffs visited the Shetlands between April 15th and 24th,
1904; in May of the same year one was seen by Mr. John S. Tulloch at
Lerwick, and on May 27th, one was killed there by a cat.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-SYLVIINÆ.
THE SIBERIAN CHIFFCHAFF.
Phylloscopus tristis, BLYTH.
AN example was obtained at a lighthouse off the Orkneys in 1902.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-SYLVIINÆ.
THE GREENISH WILLOW-WARBLER.
Phylloscopus viridanus, BLYTH.
THIS bird was obtained in Lincolnshire, on September 5th, 1896; a second
struck Sule Skerry Lighthouse (Sutherlandshire), on September 5th, 1902.
An example of the Great Reed-Warbler was shot near St. Leonards, in
September, 1903; a male at Bexhill, in May, 1905; one at Christchurch, Hants,
in May, 1900; one seen at Horning, Norfolk, in May, 1906; there is also an
example in the Charterhouse collection shot at Godalming (Surrey), in 1858, which
had been overlooked by Ornithologists, and a specimen believed to be this species
was shot at Tresco (Scilly), but escaped.
Specimens (ten), of the Aquatic Warbler have been secured in Hampshire,
Sussex, Norfolk, and Ireland, in addition to others seen.
Additional records have been published of the shooting of the Alpine Accentor
in Hampshire, Surrey, Norfolk, and Cornwall.
The Bearded Reedling has been obtained in Rutland, January, 1905, and five
were seen near Godalming (Surrey), in 1902; one in Hertfordshire, in January,
1905, and it is now believed to be on the increase in Norfolk; it has once
occurred in Scilly.
A company of Long-tailed Tits was observed in 1903 in Lewis (Outer
Hebrides), to which islands it was new. The Great Tit has also been recorded
from Scotland, and the Shetlands. The Crested Tit was seen near Yarmouth in
the autumn of 1888.
The Creeper was obtained in Shetland, in December, 1906; a Wall-Creeper
was shot near Hastings, in December, 1905, and one in Alderney (Channel Islands),
in December, 1899.
Family-MOTACILLIDÆ.
THE GREY-HEADED WAGTAIL.
Motacilla borealis, SUND.
THIS race of the Blue-headed Wagtail was obtained originally near Penzance.
In 1901 one was caught near Halifax, and in 1903 two were shot near
Willingdon, Sussex. A pair with nest and eggs were obtained in June,
1906, in a marsh between Rye and Lydd. A male was shot at Winchelsea, in
May, 1907.
In summer the Shore-Lark inhabits the dry sandy plains and rocky hills of
the tundras, only approaching the rivers to drink. Seebohm says that it seems to
be entirely a ground bird, and he never saw it either on a tree or a bush.
Everyone speaks well of the song of the Shore-Lark, for although it is short
and not very varied it is full of melody. It is sung by the bird not only when
on the earth-but, as with the Sky-Lark, much more frequently when the bird is
soaring in the air. At such times it is said to atone for the brevity of its song
by repeating it over and over again: this is practically what Alauda arvensis does
if you take the trouble to listen to him attentively. The call-note is described
as loud and clear.
As is the case with all our Larks, this species forms its nest in a slight
depression in the earth or among stones; sometimes entirely unprotected, but at
other times under the shelter of rushes. The nest, owing to the country where
it is constructed, naturally differs somewhat in its materials from those of the
Larks with which we are familiar in England; externally it is similar, being
formed of dead grasses, bents, etc.; but internally it is lined with willow-down
and reindeer hair. The eggs number from four to five, rarely three (the latter
probably not representing a full clutch) and chiefly differ from those of the Sky-
Lark in their generally more olive tint.
To show how easily this apparently conspicuous species may be overlooked,
Mr. Fenwick Hole, in the "Field," for Nov. 19th, 1864, recorded the fact of his
shooting a pair, of which he only secured one, under the impression that they
were common Sky-Larks. He says "I was only led to shoot at them at all from
a desire to try my big duck gun at such small objects on the ground; you may,
therefore, judge of my surprise, when picking up the dead specimen, at my double
stroke of good luck-firstly, chancing to alight on such a rarity; and secondly,
firing at it at all."
Speaking of three specimens shot out of a flock of about twenty at Lowestoft,
in February, 1865, the late Henry Stevenson says:-"The contents of their crops
* * * appeared to consist of seeds of Polygonaceæ and the chrysalis of some
small insect."
The food of this Lark consists very largely of seeds, although in the summer
insects, their larvæ, and pupæ, as well (doubtless) as spiders are eaten; it also
devours small mollusca and crustacea cast up on the sea-shore.
Being both tame, beautiful, and musical, the Shore-Lark is often caged; and
of late years, it has frequently been exhibited at bird shows.
Herr Gätke observes:-"On account of its pleasing appearance I have kept
one of these birds for years in a cage. The song, though by no means loud, is
entitled "Little Brothers of the Air."* The accuracy of this lady's observations
will be at once recognized by all who have carefully studied the habits of birds.
The authoress' plea for the Crow, at the end of that chapter of her book,
though true in a measure of our Rook, could not be used in defence of the
Carrion or Hooded Crows; she says:- "A Crow parent on a foraging ex-
pedition is a most unwelcome visitor to the farmer with young chickens, or the
bird-lover interested in the fate of nestlings. Yet when I saw the persecuted
creature in the character of provider for four hungry and ever clamorous mouths,
to whose wants she is as alive as we are to the wants of our babies, I took a
new view of Crow depredations, and could not see why her children should not
have a chicken or a bird for breakfast, as well as ours. Poor hunted Crow,
against whom every man's hand is raised! She feels, with reason, that every
human being is a deadly enemy thirsting for her life, that every cylinder pointed
upwards is loaded with death, that every string is a cruel snare to entangle and
maim her-yet whose offspring, dear as ours to us, clamour for food. How
should she know that it is wrong to eat chickens; or that Robin babies were
made to live and grow up, and Crow babies to die of starvation? The farmer
ignores the millions of insects she destroys, and shoots her for the one chicken
she takes, though she has been amply proved to be one of his most valuable
servants."
The note of the Rook is usually carr; but sometimes caw, and one of the
birds in a neighbour's rookery, born and reared during incessant rains, seemed to
have contracted a chronic cold, for his note was like that of a Golden Eagle, ar-ee-o.
The food in summer consists of grain, worms, snails, insects and their larvæ,
and in dry-seasons or arid localities, of mice, fish, mollusca, young birds, eggs,
the maggots in carrion and possibly the flesh itself. Later in the year fruits,
beech-nuts, acorns, and berries; but in winter, when all these are gone, it has
to get what it can from refuse heaps or from the scraps cast out from houses;
though, when opportunity offers, it does not scruple to destroy sparrows and
other small birds.
The Rook is not suitable either for cage or aviary; my brother had one for
some time, but it was anything but an interesting pet. Mr. J. Lewis Bonhote
writes:-"The Rook is harmless; but, like the Carrion-Crow, very sluggish in
its movements; scarcely ever uttering a sound. It is also very wild and never
attempts to talk, at least that is my experience."†
Rhine, near Mulheim, I found the Corn-Bunting abundantly established on the
lower grounds. During great heat the males sang incessantly (their mates were
sitting) perching indifferently on the ground, on low bushes and rails, on the tops
of walnut trees, and on the telegraph wires. Their song seemed to be identical
with the dialect of those I had met with at home, with a single exception. On
June 19th, a Corn-Bunting perching on a telegraph wire poured forth a liquid and
sweet song, embodying the notes of the Crested Lark, which latter species is
resident, though scarce, in that district. That the Reed Bunting has a good ear,
and can be trained to sing the Skylark's song I have recorded elsewhere, but I
never suspected the Corn-Bunting of a similar capacity."
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-EMBERIZINÆ.
THE YELLOW BUNTING.
Emberiza citrinella, LINN.
THE Yellow Ammer or Hammer, as this bird is generally called (from the
German name Goldammer, which means Golden Bunting)* is generally
distributed throughout the greater part of Europe, breeding in Scandinavia
as far north as lat. 70°, and in the valley of the Ob, in Siberia, up to lat 64°.
To the more northern portions of its range it is only a summer visitor, and it only
visits the more southern portions in the winter, but in the temperate regions it
is resident; in winter it occurs southwards through Turkey into N.W. Persia
and Turkestan. Although almost unknown in S.W. Spain, it is said to be resident
in Teneriffe.
Throughout Great Britain this species is abundant and generally distributed,
breeding everywhere excepting, perhaps, in the Shetlands.
between the sexes.* The song is generally heard when the bird is flying in the
air, soaring like a Lark, and is continued until the bird alights on some grassy
knoll or stunted bush, descending with outspread wings and tail. What I take
to be the alarm-note of this bird is a plaintive but loud chee-up, often heard near
its nest. The female has a song almost as rich as that of the male. The Lapland
Bunting is not such a coast bird as the Snow-Bunting, and seeks the swampiest
ground it can find so long as there are dry tussocks of grass full of flowers where
it can breed; if there are also a few stunted willows or birches upon which it can
perch, so much the better. The nest is almost always placed in some hole in the
side of one of the little mounds or tussocks which abound on the marshy parts of
the tundra; it is composed of dry grass and roots, and profusely lined with feathers.
The eggs of the Lapland Bunting are from four to six in number, and differ very
much both in size and colour. They vary in ground-colour from pale grey to pale
brown, more or less obscured by a profusion of underlying blotches and streaks,
which vary in colour from yellowish-brown to reddish-brown; the overlying
markings are generally much fewer, and are principally streaks mixed with a few
blotches and spots of dark reddish-brown." (Hist. British Birds, Vol. II, pp. 132,
133).
Herr Gätke states that this species, in its character, "is altogether unlike the
Snow-Bunting, having nothing of the boisterousness and wildness of that species,
but being of a gentle and quiet disposition. Indeed, I have frequently for years
kept it confined in a cage, and its melodious, if somewhat melancholy, tune has
given me much enjoyment during many a summer night spent at my desk over
these pages. The song of the Snow-Bunting has exactly the same character; but
the melodious, flute-like notes are fuller, and the bird in confinement will only
give utterance to them during the first hours of June and July nights. The Snow-
Bunting remains, however, so utterly intractable, crying like one possessed when
any person approaches its cage, that it is impossible to make friends with it, and
one generally ends by once more giving the peevish fellow his liberty.
The Lapland Bunting, on the other hand, ceases fluttering after one or two
weeks confinement if one keeps renewing its food, and soon becomes so tame that
it will take flies from the fingers. It also invariably accomplishes its autumn
moult to perfection, and in a very short time." (Birds of Heligoland, pp. 385-386.)
Stevenson's experience of this species as a cage-bird seems to have been much
the same as Gätke's; he says:-"Unlike most birds when first confined in a cage,
it seemed perfectly at home, feeding readily on the seed placed for it, and both
sets off to fly to some point, changes his mind, swings gracefully round and
alights on the exact spot from which he started; indeed he is very fond of
aerial evolutions; his wings are rapidly flapped when on the wing, and when he
alights on the ground he generally comes down with either a see-sawing or spiral
motion. On the ground he is almost as fussy as a Starling in his search for
worms or leather-jackets of which I have seen him carry many to his nest from
my garden: undoubtedly he does fulfil his duties in the scheme of nature.
The cries of this bird have been variously described as cae, caw, quick, jack,
&c., but the only notes which I have heard uttered by wild Jackdaws have been
chack and chark, from which sounds, without question, its name has been derived:
its note is utterly unlike that of the Rook or any of the other British Crows.
The Jackdaw as a rule is gregarious in its habits; although in the suburbs,
a pair will sometimes take possession of a chimney, in which they will build
alone; consorting, however, when feeding, with the Rooks which inhabit some
avenue of elms in the neighbourhood: but, whenever possible, this species breeds
in colonies, the nest being almost invariably placed in some crevice or hole in
rock, building, tree,* or even a rabbit-burrow; ivy-clad ruins and belfries of old
churches being favourite sites.
Nidification commences in April or May, frequently not until the latter month,
and the nest varies considerably in bulk according to the site in which it is con-
structed; it is always carelessly formed and generally of the veriest rubbish;
wool and moss are often used, but those which I have found in belfries consisted
merely of sticks and a little dirty straw, with a few feathers; whilst one in my
collection taken from the winding staircase leading up to the belfry of old Milton
Church, near Sittingbourne, on 25th May, 1887, consists of a great mass of hair
(either the winter-coat of horses, or refuse from a barber's) with a little loose earth,
a dead leaf or two, and a little dirty straw: the depression for the eggs is very
shallow.
The eggs number from four to six and vary a good deal, but the commonest
type is pale blue, more or less boldly spotted with sepia, and with lavender-grey
shell-spots; sometimes the spots are absent, and I have seen a few eggs in which
the markings were small, numerous, and pale, almost resembling eggs of the Magpie.
The Jackdaw pairs for life: it rears only one brood in a season. Its food
consists in summer chiefly of worms, all kinds of injurious grubs, especially those
of the crane-fly, the cockchafer, the wireworm, also insects, mollusca, and (it must
alas be admitted) eggs and young of other birds, grain, peas and early fruits:
FAMILY HIRUNDINIDÆ.
SEEBOHM widely dissevers the Swallows from the Flycatchers, placing them
immediately after the Buntings; possibly because of the fact that the tenth
primary is small and concealed by the upper covert, but is not absent as
Seebohm states. He says that they "are distinguished by their long pointed
wings, slender, wide bills, and small legs and feet. The * * * * ninth
primary is generally the longest. The tarsus is scutellated in front, and the tail
is generally forked. The most marked feature in the Swallows is that they have
no autumn moult, their new dress being assumed in February."
The broad bill, small feet, and long pointed wings of the Swallows, appear to
me to show some affinity to the Flycatchers; whilst I find that Hemichelidon fuli-
ginosus, which Jerdon placed among the most typical Flycatchers of India, is said
to have "very much the aspect of a Swallow, both in colour and structure" (Birds
of India, Vol. I, p. 458). That certainly seems a hardly natural classification, which
interposes the whole of the Crows, Waxwings, Starlings, and Finches, between two
groups of birds so similar in their methods of feeding, and so eminently fitted for
an aerial existence as the Flycatchers and Swallows.
The Hirundinidæ constitute a large, interesting, and widely distributed family
of very beautiful birds; their nests, familiar to everyone, are triumphs of skill
and perseverance; and, as regards our three British species, show good distinctive
features.
Although it would hardly be supposed that Swallows were suitable subjects
for aviculture; attempts have been made, with varying success, to keep the whole
of our three species: but, to preserve the health of such active birds, a great deal
of exercise is a necessity, and a very large aviary a consequent requisite: as cage-
birds, Swallows frequently quickly succumb to indigestion from over-feeding, and
lack of exercise.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily- EMBERIZINÆ.
THE BLACK-HEADED BUNTING.
Emberiza melanocephala, SCOP.
IN spite of the fact that the Black-headed Bunting has hardly any claim to be
called a British bird, it is necessary to give an account and illustration of it,
in order that the confusion existing in the minds of many, respecting this
species and the Reed Bunting, may be abolished.
Dr. Sharpe summarizes the distribution of this bird as follows:-"Southern
Europe from Asia Minor and Greece, westwards to Southern Germany and Southern
France, eastwards to North-western and Central India." Howard Saunders says:-
"In Greece, Turkey, the Danubian Provinces, Southern Russia, Asia Minor, Pales-
tine, and Northern Persia, it is common from the end of April to autumn, after
which it leaves for its winter quarters in North-western and Central India."
Gätke, speaking of it in Heligoland observes:-"I obtained the first example
of this large and handsome Bunting on the 4th of June, 1845; it is an old male
in which, singularly, the normal black markings of the head not only extend
downwards along the sides of the neck, but the fore-neck also has a long black
longitudinal patch. Since that time the species has occurred here about fifteen
times, and has been killed in most of these cases."
When Seebohm published his History of British Birds, Vol. II, in 1884, only
one example of this species had been obtained, it was shot by Mr. Robert Brazener,
on Brighton racecourse, on the 3rd November, 1868. In 1888, Howard Saunders
was able to add two occurrences of the Black-headed Bunting (Manual British
Birds, p. 197) one recorded by the Rev. J. R. Ashworth (in the "Zoologist" for
1886, p. 73) as having been shot in Nottinghamshire; and the other as having
been captured about November 5th, 1886, near Dunfermline, and exhibited at the
Crystal Palace Show, February 12th to 17th, 1887, where it was recognized by
the late Rev. H. A. Macpherson. It was then purchased by Mr. J. C. Steele, of
Beckenham, who exhibited it at the Palace every year up to 1891, taking a first
prize up to 1890. In 1891 it was recognized and labelled as "Black-headed
Bunting" by the late Mr. Jenner Weir at the West Kent Ornithological Show;
but, knowing that the carelessness of some popular writers had prejudiced the
it is found across Asia; on the American Continent it breeds in large colonies
in Alaska, and up to 68° N. lat. on the Mackenzie River; and we trace it to
Newfoundland. In winter it vists Mexico, Central America, and the valley of the
Amazon; and-in the Old World-China, the Indian region, and South-eastern
Africa down to Zanzibar. Occasionally it wanders to the Canary Islands."
In Great Britain this bird is generally distributed wherever the nature of the
soil is suited to its requirements when breeding: to the Shetlands, however, it
appears to be only an occasional visitor.
The adult Sand-Martin has the upper parts mouse-brown, slightly darker on
the crown and paler on the rump; the wings and tail blackish-brown; under parts
white, with a broad brown band across the breast; bill black; feet dark brown,
with a few buffish feathers at the back of the tarsus; iris hazel. The female
nearly resembles the male, but is said to have a slightly narrower band across the
breast.* The young have most of the feathers of the upper parts tipped with
buffish white, and the under parts, especially the chin and throat, more or less
washed with buff.
The Sand-Martin reaches our shores at the end of March, or beginning of
April, and immediately repairs to its chosen building site, usually a nearly per-
pendicular wall of hard sand or gravel, either on the bank of river, loch, or lake,
along the sea-shore, at the side of a railway-cutting, a road-side where the banks
are high, a sand- or gravel-pit, or a brick-earth cutting. Seebohm also mentions
having seen heaps of half-rotten sawdust utilized; but of whatever substance the
bank may consist, the Sand-Martin proceeds to excavate a slightly sloping, or at
times even a very obliquely upward slanting tunnel. In the first season this tunnel
rarely exceeds a foot, or at most eighteen inches, in length; and, if the bird finds
any obstruction, such as a flint-stone or tough root in the way, the tunnel some-
times turns almost at right angles, or even slopes obliquely backwards and upwards:
year by year this tunnel is excavated further inwards, until it sometimes reaches
a length of from three to four feet. At the end of the tunnel a small chamber
is hollowed out, sometimes a little above, but in a line with the tunnel, but often
on one side of it; and in the bottom of this chamber the nest is formed.
The nest of the Sand-Martin is very slight, and loosely constructed of a little
dry grass, rootlets, and rarely a straw or two; the lining, when there is one, consists
of feathers; when the nest is not far from the entrance the feather lining is either
absent, or a few collected at random are carelessly pushed into the centre; but
when at a great distance from the light, white feathers are usually selected and
frequenting sandy roads-in which it is fond of dusting itself-and running with
great rapidity, while I have often seen it glide beneath a horse when at a slow
walk, rather than take wing. Its flight is undulating and resembles that of the
Wood-Lark. It is not gregarious, and is generally seen singly, or in pairs and
family parties. The short but rather liquid and melodious song of the male is
generally uttered on the ground, though often during a short flight, and occasion-
ally from a bush; the note may be syllabled as 'coo-hai.' The young are fed
on insects and their larvæ, but seeds and grain form the principal food of this
species, and in snowy weather it may be seen examining horse droppings, etc."
"Manual of British Birds," p. 244.
Dixon says that in Algeria he "often saw this bird soar into the air for
perhaps a hundred yards or so, all the time warbling its simple song."
Speaking of it in India, Theobald describes the nest as "a little grass in
a hole in the ground, with four ovato-pyriform yellowish-white eggs uniformly
freckled with greyish-yellow and neutral tint."
Jerdon says that the "Chendul" "feeds on various insects, chiefly grass-
hoppers, and in default of this food, on grains and seeds." In his "Birds of
India," vol. II, p. 437, he gives the following account:-"It is not known in
Bengal nor in the Himalayas, nor in the countries to the eastward. It prefers
dry open sandy plains, or ploughed land, to grass, wet meadows, or cultivation.
It rises in the air singing, though not so high as A. gulgula,* nor is its song so
fine. In winter it may be seen in small parties, or sometimes in considerable
flocks, occasionally on roads and barren places."
From what Jerdon says, the "Chendul" as the Hindoos call the species
is much esteemed on account of its song (although Seebohm states that the latter
is short and monotonous, not unlike that of a Corn-Bunting) he observes: "It is
frequently caged in all parts of the country, and the bird is kept in darkness by
several layers of cloth wrapped round the cage; the custom being to wrap an
additional cover round the cage every year. In this state it sings very sweetly,
and learns to imitate most exactly the notes of various other birds, and of animals,
such as the yelping of a dog, the mewing of a cat, the call of a hen to her
chickens, etc., etc."
Herr Rausch speaks of the Crested Lark as an original songster, but considers
that, as regards its adult wild song it is an insignificant and almost worthless
singer. Perhaps Herr Rausch, like Seebohm, may only have heard the bird sing
like a Corn-Bunting, and it is quite possible that the different races of the species
vary considerably as regards the excellence of their performance. This we know
The Lesser Redpoll in confinement is for ever fidgeting about on the wirework
of its cage, somewhat after the fashion of a Tit: during the breeding season the
male and female spend half the day in caressing like a pair of Love-birds; whilst
the song of the male at that season is frequent, but is a very poor performance,
not unlike a feeble Brambling's song, consisting (as already hinted) of a mere
monotonous trill, resembling a distant railway-guard's whistle: this trill is some-
times copied by young Canaries, and is considered ruination to their notes.
My experience of this species in an aviary is that no Finch of its size is so
mischievously meddlesome as the Lesser Redpoll; not only does it rarely breed,
but if another bird which happens to be building, leaves its nest for fresh material,
the Redpoll immediately flies down and commences to pull it to pieces. On the
other hand, Mr. G. C. Swailes, of Beverley, has been rather succesful in breeding
Redpolls.
The first Redpolls I ever had, cost me about three shillings for the pair;
but I soon discovered that I had paid at least three times their value, inasmuch as
the price asked by bird-catchers for equally good birds varied at that time from eight-
pence to a shilling the pair: altogether I have had a good many, and yet never
cared much for them: it is true that they very soon grow tame, although never so
completely so as Siskins; but after their first moult in close confinement all the
crimson and rose colouring disappears and never returns, the forehead becoming
yellowish; and even in an aviary it goes after their second moult, so that a very
soberly clad, restless, inquisitive little bird, with no proper song, but a large appetite,
is all that remains.
Herr Gätke's account of a pair of Redpolls which nested in his garden in
Heligoland is rather puzzling: he speaks of only discovering the nest in the
autumn when the leaves were falling, yet is sure of the identity of the species
from the fact that on one occasion he picked up two of the young birds, and
restored them to their home amongst the elder branches. Can the Redpolls have
been breeding in the autumn?
Two nests of the common Willow-Warbler were found and others were seen
building in the Shetlands in May, 1901.
The Wood-Warbler was heard on the Isle of Man, in May 1901 and 1905.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-SYLVIINÆ.
THE RUFOUS WARBLER.
Aedon galactodes, TEMM.
THIS rare species has occurred in Sussex and Devon in the autumn.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-SYLVIINÆ.
THE GREY-BACKED WARBLER.
Aedon familiaris.
A male was shot at Hythe, Kent, on July 15th, 1907.
Family-TURDIDÆ.
Subfamily-SYLVIINÆ.
RADDE'S BUSH-WARBLER.
Lusciniola schwarzi, RADDE.
A specimen was obtained in October, 1898, on the Lincolnshire side of the
Humber, by Mr. Haigh.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLNÆ.
THE PINE-GROSBEAK.
Pyrrhula enucleator, LINN.
FROM time to time some five and twenty occurrences of this species in Great
Britain had been recorded previous to 1900; but, as Howard Saunders
says:- "Professor Newton (4th Ed. Yarrell's B. B.) has disposed of all but
five as unworthy of belief; while, to my mind, few even of these sifted records
are entitled to acceptance." In 1905 a small flock appeared near Hawkhurst in
Kent, and subsequently in Ashburuham Park, Sussex; several specimens being
shot.
It seems to me that even if the species has been shot here, the probability is
that (in every case) the examples have either escaped or been freed from confine-
ment; inasmuch as it is not only imported from time to time as a cage-bird, but
in my short experience (commencing in July 1896)* the birds, though wonderfully
tame and intelligent, are too powerful and destructive to be trusted with weaker
companions, and eat so voraciously that their food makes a distinct difference in
one's expenses: they are like most insect-eating finches, very fond of earthworms
and green food; but the quantity of sunflower-seed and hemp which they devour
in a day is astonishing, whilst their chief amusement in my aviary consisted in
tearing ivy to pieces. A man in a hurry to part with such birds would be very
likely to turn them loose.
There is an interesting account of the breeding of this species in captivity
by Mr. W. H. St. Quintin, in the "Avicultural Magazine" 2nd sec., Vol. V,
pp. 55-56 (1906).
Fielden (P.Z.S., 1877, p. 30) in a paper on the birds of the North Polar Basin,
says:-"On the 13th May, 1876, I heard the first Snow-Bunting (Plectrophanes
nivalis) as we lay in our tent on the floe at the base of a cliff. The note came
from above, clear and musical, and each inmate of the tent started into a sitting-
posture, and said 'Hush, hush, do you hear it?' One of the sailors said to me,
'What bird is that sir? it is sweeter than a throstle.'"
My friend Mr. David Seth-Smith had a pair for a considerable time and may
perhaps still have them; I have seen them flying about in one of his garden
aviaries many times, but never heard the song.
FAMILY STURNIDÆ.
THE Starlings are an Old World family of birds linked to the Finches through
the Icteridæ or Troupials and Cow-birds of the New World; but, on the other
hand, showing affinity to the Corvidæ or Crow-family. They are character-
ized by a long straight slender bill, with the nostrils placed low down, without
rictal bristles; a very small bastard primary and very long second primary; the
tarsus is scaled in front, but not behind.
Starlings when on the ground progress in a purposeless, irregular fashion,
mostly by walking or running; on the wing their flight is powerful, but peculiar,
so that, when at a great height, it has a twinkling appearance; when at a lower
elevation this is explained by the fact that they rapidly flap their somewhat long
wings and then sail straight forwards.
These birds are practically omnivorous, always hungry and consequently large
feeders; they are, therefore, unsuitable for caged pets, unless considerable attention
can be paid to them by their owners: in themselves, however, they are cleanly,
being exceedingly fond of bathing.
The songs of Starlings are either altogether, or partly, harsh in character;
in which respect and in their powers of mimicry, they somewhat resemble their
allies the Crows. Like the latter also they soon become tame and confiding in
captivity; in which respect they widely differ from some of the Icteridæ which
never seem to get the least bit tamer after years of confinement in an aviary,
follow it closely and catch it as soon as it reaches the ground." The Pied Fly-
catcher would probably do the latter every time.
Family-MUSCICAPIDÆ
THE RED-BREASTED FLYCATCHER.
Muscicapa parva, BECHST.
WITH respect to the distribution of this species, Seebohm informs us that
it "breeds in Germany, Austria, and South Russia as far north as the
Baltic Provinces, arriving during the latter end of April, or early in
May, and departing again in August or September. Its occurrence in Western
Europe is only accidental." " Loche, says that it is found in Algeria, where it
may be a rare winter visitor. It passes through Transylvania, Turkey, Greece,
and Asia Minor on migration, and winters in Nubia." "It breeds in the Caucasus,
and winters in Persia." His further remarks tend to show that it passes through
Turkestan on migration, occurs in the Baikal district, has been obtained in Kam-
schatka, and winters in North India and South China.
Up to the date of the publication of Vol. I. of Seebohm's "History of British
Birds" in 1883, four examples had been shot, and a fifth seen in Great Britain;
the first specimen, a female, was killed near Falmouth, on January 24th, 1863; the
second and third were shot, or caught on Trescoe, in the Scilly Isles, in October
of the same year; and a fourth was shot on the 5th November, 1865. On October
the 5th, of 1883, too late to be included by Seebohm, a male was shot at Berwick-
on-Tweed, and on October 23rd, 1887, a young bird was picked up on Arklow
(South) light-ship, near Wexford: since that time other specimens have been
obtained: the specimens recorded up to the end of 1890, being thus summed up
by Mr. J. H. Gurney ("Zoologist," 1891, p. 136):-"On September 13th, a female
Red-breasted Fly-catcher, Muscicapa parva, Bechstein, was shot at Cley by Mr.
Ogilvie, the eighth on record, Cornwall being accredited with four, Ireland one,
Family-AMPELIDÆ.
THE WAXWING.
Ampelis garrulus, LINN.
AN abundant though irregular winter visitor to our islands, the Waxwing, says
Seebohm, "is almost a circumpolar bird, breeding in the pine regions of
both hemispheres at or near the Arctic circle." "Throughout Central
Europe it is a tolerable regular winter visitor. It occurs accidently on Heligoland,
and occasionally strays as far west as France, and as far south as Lombardy and
Turkey, but has not yet been recorded from Spain or Greece. It winters in South
Siberia, occasionally straying as far as Turkestan, Mongolia, North China, and the
north island of Japan. In America its winter range extends as far south as Lakes
Michigan and Erie; but it appears to be only an accidental straggler further east,
and it is doubtful if it has ever occurred west of the Rocky Mountains."
In Great Britain the Waxwing has been most frequently met with in the
northern and eastern counties; Mr. Frohawk tells me that in the winter of 1867-8
a flock of seven visited a small plantation at Brisley, in Norfolk; but in England
it has from time to time been observed in almost every county, whilst in Ireland
it has been but rarely obtained, excepting towards the end of 1903 when a good
many visited the island and twenty were shot; its visits to Scotland have been
tolerably frequent, extending even to the islands of Skye, Orkney and Shetland,
it has twice been recorded from the Outer Hebrides.
The upper surface of the adult male Waxwing is pale rosy-brown, gradually
changing to ash-grey on the rump and upper tail-coverts, and into chestnut on the
sides of the crest and forehead; a narrow frontal band, the lores, and a streak
from the back of the eye black; wings and tail almost black, the wing-coverts, the
inner webs of the primaries, and outer webs of the secondaries tipped with white,
the latter tipped with wax-like vermilion points, the outside webs of the primaries
tipped with yellow, joining the white tips of the inner webs so as to form V-like
markings; tail feathers broadly tipped with yellow; under surface rosy-brown,
shading into chestnut on the cheeks; a white streak at the base of the lower
mandible; front of throat and chin black; centre of belly whitish; under tail-
coverts chestnut; bill and feet black; iris hazel. The female is slightly duller,
years took a first prize at the Crystal Palace which seemed to have been five
years old in 1887, ten years old in 1890, and twelve years old in 1891; since
which time it became contented with a twelve-month year: possibly there may
have been three cock birds; but, with a species the nestlings of which must be
difficult to secure, this would seem less probable than that an error had occurred
in stating the age, due perhaps to the fact of no record having been kept to
which reference could be made. That the Chough can be induced to breed in a
state of partial domestication has been proved by Lady Nevill ("Zoologist," 1882,
p. 431); she says:-"For years when I lived at Dangstein I kept Choughs (P.
graculus) able to fly where they liked. They once attempted to make a nest in a
stoke-hole, but were disturbed, and never did so again. On my removal to East
Sussex I brought the Choughs (two pairs) with me, and the next year one pair
made their nest in a tower attached to the house, and laid three eggs; but they
did not sit well, and the eggs were not hatched: two of them were pulled out of
the nest. The one pair drove the others away, for when they first came they all
roosted in the tower."
It seems extremely probable that breeding experiments with one pair would
be successful. There is, however, one very strong objection to Choughs in
captivity: I understand that my friend Mr. Reginald Phillipps, a very well-known
aviculturist, at one time attempted to keep these birds; but the noise which they
made was so appalling that the neighbours were driven to the verge of madness,
and he wisely parted with his pets before any tragic climax had been arrived at.
neatly arranged, each feather lying on its face with the curved under surface
upwards, and the base of the shaft in the centre of the nest: when carefully
removed from the burrows, nests of this character are very pretty; the pinky-white
eggs appearing to lie in a pure white flower-like cup; unhappily a very slight
puff of wind disturbs their symmetry, whilst the removal of the eggs inevitably
displaces the lining, so that one never sees a really perfect Sand-Martin's nest in
any collection. One reason for the slovenliness of many cabinet nests probably
may be, that where nests are abundant, the collector is satisfied with those most
readily attainable, and thus fails to secure the best-formed specimens.
The eggs vary in number from four to six, and in form from a long to a
short oval; in colour they are pure white, very slightly glossy, and when freshly
laid show the yolk through the shell, which gives them a rosy appearance.
The burrows of Sand-Martins, although an irresistible attraction to the birds'-
nester, are often a source of considerable annoyance to railway companies; every
year fresh tunnels are added, as those first formed extend too far inwards to please
the birds, one tunnel runs into another, is abandoned, and a new one excavated:
thus the bank of the cutting becomes so much undermined, that frosts and thaws
bring about a land-slip, and a temporary block to traffic is occasioned.
Of all nests which I have taken, I know of none which so swams with fleas
and ticks as that of the Sand-Martin; the young birds if taken out and examined,
will frequently be found to have large ticks attached to their heads, usually either
on the crown or nape; whilst, in old colonies, the fleas skip about in myriads:
how the poor birds exist under the incessant irritation of these lively vermin is a
puzzle; but perhaps, like the African attacked by chigos, they enjoy the sensation.
The call-note of this bird is thin and shrill-a sort of sweer: the only attempt
at a song which I have heard is a short low twittering, somewhat vaguely resembling
part of the song of the Reed-Warbler, and usually uttered when two birds meet
in the air and flutter a moment before continuing their onward flight.
Like the other Swallows, this bird is purely insectivorous; its food principally
consisting of gnats and small flies, which adhere to its viscid saliva, as with wide-
open gape it pursues them in the air: it has been stated to feed its young occa-
sionally with large dragon-flies, but this seems rather improbable, the bodies of
these insects being so long, that (if given entire) they could not be swallowed by
such tiny birds: the only chance is, that the greed of these nestlings which, when
fed, frequently try to swallow one another's heads, might possibly enable them to
tear the body of the dragon-fly in half. The Sand-Martin usually produces two
broods in the year, the first nest being rarely full before the beginning of June,
and the second about the middle of July, or even later: the return migration
in one of my aviaries built a typical nest (in August) in a small yew-tree; she
laid four eggs and sat steadily for a week, when she deserted them and died the
following day: examination showed acute inflammation of the cloaca; two of the
eggs, which I put under a Canary, were hatched but not reared.
The natural song of the Bullfinch is very poor, reminding one of a Jew's-
harp; but hand-reared birds can, with the help of a musical-box, be taught to
whistle entire tunes very prettily. The call-note is a soft plaintive whistle,
difficult to write down, as it commences without any initial consonant; the word
diu which has been frequently used to express it, bears no resemblance whatever
to the sound; hoo would be nearer, but is too abrupt; wheo is a better rendering.
In the winter the Bullfinch becomes much less retiring, and more confiding
in its habits, frequenting gardens and orchards: and in its love for buds, par-
ticularly of fruit-trees, often doing considerable mischief: father, mother, and family,
sometimes taking up positions on the same tree, and going to work systematically.
Attempts have often been made by well-meaning Ornithologists to defend this
action on the part of the Bullfinch, by declaring (without a particle of evidence
in favour of the assertion) that the birds are in reality the fruit-grower's best
friends; inasmuch as they only select those buds which contain maggots. Such
utter nonsense could only be written by those who have not studied birds in
captivity, and in large aviaries containing living shrubs and creepers.
Seebohm was far more sensible than to perpetuate so flimsy an excuse, for
he says:-"it is seldom respected by the gardener, who, in shooting it down,
makes bad worse, and does more damage in one discharge of his gun than a host
of Bullfinches would do in a week. Early in the year the bird may often be
seen on the branches of cherry-, plum-, apple-, and pear-trees, or on the twigs
of the gooseberry- and currant-bushes, and the ground is strewed with the cases
of the buds, marking out its course. Singularly enough the bird confines it
attentions to the flower-buds, those producing leaves being passed by. This
destructive habit of the Bullfinch cannot be defended or excused; but further
research may prove that the bird is, after all, a real benefactor to the tree from
which it levies such a costly tribute."
It does not strike me as singular that the Bullfinch should prefer the short
stout buds to the thin pointed ones, but that is a detail. One thing must be
borne in mind, however, that, in the older trees, if the Bullfinches reduce the
number of fruit buds, they save the gardener the trouble of pruning away super-
fluous fruit; so that, as a matter of fact, the resulting crop may be just as good
in the end, though with less trouble to the grower.
If you want a tree to die, there are few surer ways of killing it than by
strongest nestlings always fight their way to the front, so that the weaker birds
are unable to get sufficient food to sustain life and quickly die.
In 1888 I successfully reared two nests of Linnets (nine birds) feeding them
at first on egg-food; and, as they grew stronger, upon scalded German rape;
unfortunately the whole of them died after their moult from inflammation of the
bowels. Since then I have been contented to return to my original plan and
purchase my Linnets from the bird-catchers.
The Linnet occasionally hybridizes in a wild state with the Greenfinch (Vide
Stevenson, Birds of Norfolk, p. 220; Seebohm, British Birds, Vol. II. p. 77; Howard
Saunders, Manual Brit. Birds, p. 162; Gurney, Zoologist, p. 3388; Rev. H. A.
Macpherson, Zoologist, 1887, p. 303, etc., etc.); and in captivity it has been
successfully crossed with several species, including the Canary; this last-mentioned
bastard is not at all difficult to produce, for my first attempt resulted in three
mules; but to breed hybrid Linnet-Canaries good enough to carry off prizes at
our shows requires judgment and experience. The rarest and most valued
examples are those known as clear mules, in which the colouring of the Canary
is combined with Linnet characteristics. theoretically these should be most readily
produced, when both parents have been inbred for several generations; albinism,
or the absence of dark colouring, being a frequent result of inbreeding.
Family-FRINGILLIDÆ.
Subfamily-FRINGILLINÆ.
THE HOUSE-SPARROW.
Passer domesticus, LINN.
THIS scavenger of towns and scourge of the country is distributed over the
greater part of Europe, but in Italy and on the island of Corsica is replaced
by a form to which the name of P. italiæ has been given; eastwards it
ranges to Persia and Central Asia, India and Ceylon; westwards it is found in
